[Amit Varma]: All of us are wired for empathy but we express it in different ways. When we see the suffering
[Amit Varma]: of others, some of us stay silent and mind our own business. Some of us express our sympathy
[Amit Varma]: or our outrage if there is cause for outrage. Talk is cheap and these days posturing is
[Amit Varma]: easy, especially on social media. Some of us go a step further and take some kind of
[Amit Varma]: initiative. Start an online petition, maybe donate to a good cause, share information
[Amit Varma]: about how to help. Some of us even go out in the real world to try and make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe we go to marches or protest rallies, maybe file a PIL or an RTI application. But
[Amit Varma]: a few people decide to dedicate their lives to helping others. They fight to leave the
[Amit Varma]: world a better place than it was when they got there. They don't know if they'll succeed.
[Unknown]: They do it because they have to.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest for today is Kavita Krishnan, feminist, activist,
[Amit Varma]: politician, communist. Kavita is on the Politburo of the CPIML, the Communist Party of India,
[Amit Varma]: Marxist-Leninist, but is best known for her fearless feminism. She burst into national
[Amit Varma]: attention when a powerful speech by her in the anti-rape protests of 2012 went viral.
[Amit Varma]: She went on to write a fabulous book called Fearless Freedom, which lays out the sorry
[Amit Varma]: state of women in India, but also articulates a feminist manifesto of sorts, which has found
[Amit Varma]: much resonance among young people. Now, Kavita is a card-carrying communist, but that does
[Amit Varma]: not make her a dogmatic leftist, as the stereotype goes. Over the years that I have followed
[Amit Varma]: her work, I have found that she is driven by empathy and outrage, and not by ideology
[Amit Varma]: or dogma. She is always open to dialogue, and her loyalty is to her principles, and
[Amit Varma]: not to any of the political tribes around us. She was an outspoken critic of the acquittals
[Amit Varma]: of Mahmud Faruqi and Tarun Tejpal, who had more or less confessed to rape, but were let
[Amit Varma]: off by the courts. Many hypocritical Delhi elites, who call themselves liberal, supported
[Amit Varma]: Faruqi and Tejpal, and attacked Krishnan for her views. But I share those views, and I
[Amit Varma]: admire how Kavita takes no prisoners. I was delighted when she agreed to come on the show,
[Amit Varma]: because I wanted to understand these feminist struggles a little better, not just in terms
[Amit Varma]: of theories and ideas, because we can all read books and signal virtue on social media,
[Amit Varma]: but in terms of the struggles on the ground. Our conversation lasted more than four hours,
[Amit Varma]: and it felt way too short. I didn't cover a lot of the ground I wanted to, and yet I
[Amit Varma]: got so much food for thought. I also made a conscious decision before this episode that
[Amit Varma]: I would not get into arguments about Marx or communism or the Soviet Union or Cuba under
[Amit Varma]: Castro, all of whom Kavita admires, and I absolutely don't. I didn't want to get combative
[Amit Varma]: about ideology in this conversation. I wanted to focus on learning from her remarkable personal
[Amit Varma]: journey as well as her powerful work as a feminist. This was such a rewarding conversation
[Amit Varma]: for me. But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up-level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with ideas, skills,
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Kavita, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we start talking about our subject for the day and so on, tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about how the last few months have been for you. Like it's kind of been
[Amit Varma]: tough for all of us. And you know, how's it been for you? How are you doing?
[Guest]: It's actually been very, very, very difficult. You know, we all went through such a terrible
[Guest]: time with the second wave of the pandemic. And I think it came really close home for
[Guest]: everybody, you know, it didn't remain something abstract and remote. So of course, one of
[Guest]: the things was that I actually did get COVID. So it was reasonably mild and happened about
[Guest]: a couple of weeks after my first dose of the vaccine. So maybe that kept it mild. But still,
[Guest]: it was, you know, stressful, of course, because you worry. And I still have some of the after
[Guest]: effects as in, you know, insomnia and all of that. But I think beyond that, I think
[Guest]: the losses of people, I think in such a short time, we lost people, I lost people who were
[Guest]: very close comrades, absolutely, you know, indispensable people who I could not have
[Guest]: imagined losing at this point. Very good friends, very, very young people, colleagues of my
[Guest]: partner, as well as, you know, other young teachers whom I have known in Delhi University
[Guest]: and all work about my age. So all of those were very, very difficult to deal with. And
[Guest]: I think for me, the most challenging thing was that because I got COVID, I was not able
[Guest]: to really step out and be in the middle of any of the relief work physically. And I think
[Guest]: that was the only thing which may have actually prevented, might prevent one from feeling
[Guest]: as helpless and as bad, you know, because you are at least able to. Last year, during
[Guest]: the lockdown, I know that that's how we got through it, because this terrible scene of
[Guest]: the migrant workers, you know, walking and dying. The only thing which we did night and
[Guest]: day at that time was just trying to keep in touch with as many as we could and getting
[Guest]: relief out. So this time, not personally not being able to do that, and there were others
[Guest]: doing it, but that was that made it even harder. But I mean, we picked ourselves up now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's interesting, you know, you use the word helpless, because what struck me
[Amit Varma]: was that early last year, it was probably a time of a certain kind of hope, like even
[Amit Varma]: though the economy was doing really badly, things were bleak, but there was hope because
[Amit Varma]: in the CAA protest, we saw a lot of people kind of come together, you know, we saw young
[Amit Varma]: people throughout the country protesting, waving the constitution over a thunk and all
[Amit Varma]: of that happening and suddenly boom, you know, COVID happens and, and then there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: you can do, like, you know, where do you protest? What do you do? It was just so strikingly
[Amit Varma]: tough, and it's still sort of going on. Let's, let's sort of move back to...
[Guest]: You also had the farmers movement, actually, you also had the farmers movement in between,
[Guest]: which was also a, you know, a restoration of hope and all of that. But I think the second
[Guest]: wave of the pandemic and the manner in which it has, it came, in a way, I think what made
[Guest]: it worse, at least for me was that in a way I could see it coming. So since January, I
[Guest]: had friends of mine who got COVID in December, in January. So at that time, also, we were
[Guest]: trying to, you know, say to people that please don't hold panchayat elections in UP in this,
[Guest]: in the next few months, and maybe don't hold assembly elections now, and all of that, because
[Guest]: it looked like it was getting worse. And, you know, anyone following this knew that
[Guest]: a second wave was coming. That made it much, much harder to, you know, feel that your voice
[Guest]: is just counting for nothing. It's like doubting Cassandra, you know, that you know what's
[Guest]: going to happen. And everybody is going to say, you're doubting and look, kitna changa
[Guest]: hai, kitna positive hai. That was horrible.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned the UP panchayat elections and my thought went to the, you know, the 1600,
[Amit Varma]: I think the last count was the teachers who died because they were forced to go on duty,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically a murder. And it's not, it's not that you were the only sort of doubting
[Amit Varma]: Cassandra. They're used to ignoring the activists, but they ignored the scientists, they ignored
[Amit Varma]: the experts. So that's kind of bizarre.
[Guest]: They even ignored a chief minister. Apparently, the Uttarakhand chief minister was, you know,
[Guest]: replaced by Tirath Singh Rawat, who's now the chief minister, because he was trying
[Guest]: to say, look, it might not be a good idea to hold the Kumbh Mela at this time, you know,
[Guest]: it might not be a good idea to advance it a year and hold it in 2021 in April. So they
[Guest]: told him, all right, we'll send you packing and, you know, get somebody who's okay with
[Guest]: this package, with the agenda. It's terrible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, lots happening. Let's get back to the subject at hand. And now that you're finally
[Amit Varma]: on the show, you know, take me back to your early life, because we actually share the
[Amit Varma]: same year of birth. I think I'm a few months younger. And so I'm curious about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me about it. I know, I know from the biographical details that you grew
[Amit Varma]: up in Bhilai and all of that. But tell me a bit about your childhood, what was growing
[Amit Varma]: up like and so on.
[Guest]: I think that I had a bit of an idyllic childhood, because I did not really face any difficulties
[Guest]: in childhood. It was a very happy time in a sense. And my because my parents were actually,
[Guest]: you know, pretty great. And the strange thing is that I think they were greater after I
[Guest]: was born. So my dad used to tell me that, you know, theirs was an arranged marriage.
[Guest]: So they probably came from very different backgrounds. My dad was quite conservative
[Guest]: in his thinking, he had not had much exposure to, you know, young women. And suddenly, he
[Guest]: was married to this extremely smart, khub bolne wali, bilkul matlab bebak, besharam ladki.
[Guest]: So he suddenly didn't really know what hit him. And, but, you know, so they kind of made
[Guest]: a go of it. But he told me that, you know, it was after I was born that they really had,
[Guest]: he said, you know, we didn't have our honeymoon period when we should have, but we had it
[Guest]: after you were born, because that's when we really fell more in love with each other and
[Guest]: all of that. So I think that's probably true, because my father also kind of relaxed, I
[Guest]: think, and, you know, forgot about what kind of things he had been taught about how to
[Guest]: be a man. And he just enjoyed being a dad so much. And he didn't think of himself as
[Guest]: being the dad of a daughter. You know, so it was more of, you know, he was a very relaxed
[Guest]: dad. And my mother was a natural feminist. She didn't use the word feminism very much
[Guest]: as we were growing up. But her natural instinct, you know, instinctual response to almost everything
[Guest]: was very, very principled, and very feminist, and also very, as in she would keep saying,
[Guest]: in circumstances, we would see her doing this. So in circumstances where she would be alone,
[Guest]: and there would be a social kind of consensus that something should be done, but she felt
[Guest]: that was wrong, she would kind of just step in. So I did see her do this kind of thing.
[Guest]: And we kind of grew up thinking this was the thing to do, say, if somebody is saying that
[Guest]: a thief has been caught, and now he should be beaten up. So she would kind of, you know,
[Guest]: step in and say, what on earth, why, you know, he's just some pocket money, he's just, you
[Guest]: know, stolen some little thing, and he's a kid and what on earth. So you'd find her in
[Guest]: this confrontation, you'd find a confronting people who would be trying to beat a dog to
[Guest]: death or something. So that kind of thing also sort of came with the package of being
[Guest]: my parents' daughter. And then there was my sister also. So we grew up very, and we grew
[Guest]: up without anybody really looking over our shoulders much. Bhilai was initially a little
[Guest]: bit of a safer place. Gradually, it became pretty unsafe for girls. But when we were
[Guest]: very young, as until I was about 10 or so, we wandered around everywhere. We had a stray
[Guest]: dog who used to be our guardian. So me and several other girls my age would just get
[Guest]: up early in the morning and wander and have these adventures and pretend we were Famous
[Guest]: Five and this and that with just that dog and his dog friends on hand. And my parents
[Guest]: didn't worry. And my mother also had grown up that way because she said her parents also
[Guest]: kind of, she would wander around Delhi with a fruit and a book in her hand and go to ruins
[Guest]: in Delhi and just spend the whole day there just reading and so on. I said, my God, if
[Guest]: you do that now, her parents would have heart attacks because of how unsafe it's become.
[Guest]: But when she was a child, it was possible. So that was what it was like. I mean, I wasn't
[Guest]: exposed to activism as a child, not at all. There was activism in Bhilai at that time,
[Guest]: but I was unaware of it. I was an officer's daughter in the steel plant. We had friends
[Guest]: who were workers who would, but they were not trade union activists as such. So I did
[Guest]: not really know them very well. You know, the only trade union person I knew as a child
[Guest]: was a somebody who was used to run the Bata shop, you know, the shoe shop. So he was a
[Guest]: Bengali person and he was very much leftist and he was part of trade unions and also he
[Guest]: would chatter on about trade union. And my mother used to enjoy these chats, I knew.
[Guest]: So it would kind of pass over me. My dad was completely bored by politics, least interested.
[Guest]: My mother was the journalist's daughter and very interested in politics and also she would
[Guest]: follow the news and all. So it's like that.
[Amit Varma]: Many stands to explore here, but I'll take a quick digression. And you pointed out that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your mother used to walk around Delhi with a fruit and a book and sit in the
[Amit Varma]: ruins and read and that was no longer possible. And of course, today we know how things are.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that things have become so much worse?
[Guest]: I don't know, actually. I mean, it's not just Delhi, of course, even, I mean, she's done
[Guest]: the same thing in Chennai. She said she used to, she and her sister used to just wander
[Guest]: around barefoot here and there. And, you know, her parents didn't have to worry so much about
[Guest]: safety. So I'm not sure what has changed. But I think that what I can imagine, at least
[Guest]: about Delhi, is that at that time, it was largely a rural area. You know, she said that
[Guest]: her school was, which was Frank Antony Public School. So she said, you know, walking from
[Guest]: Defence Colony to Frank Antony Public School meant she would be walking through fields.
[Guest]: There would actually be fields there. There would actually be green fields there. So I
[Guest]: think that the change in Delhi, which was social change and not just a demographic change
[Guest]: and it's becoming a more urban capital city, and these, you know, the villages of Delhi
[Guest]: becoming, they're still villages in name, you know, it's still Munir Ka Gaon, but it's
[Guest]: become a real estate kind of based, it's not a agriculture based society, it's a real estate
[Guest]: based society. And I think that somehow that transition has not been very organic. I would
[Guest]: say, you know, Bombay is becoming a city has been much more organic, because there's been
[Guest]: a large working class and that has shaped the culture of the city. But in Delhi, it
[Guest]: isn't, that's the rentier class that has shaped it. And somehow, I mean, that has not led
[Guest]: to a change in how Delhi looks at women. So that change, I see happening a little bit
[Guest]: more now, in fact, you know, with, but I know that in the 90s, when I came to Delhi first
[Guest]: from Bombay, it was a terrible culture shock. A friend and I came from Bombay to Delhi,
[Guest]: and I'd done my BA in Bombay. When I came to Delhi, we would walk around wearing the
[Guest]: same stuff that we'd worn in Bombay, which was fairly, you know, raggedy stuff and ordinary
[Guest]: stuff, nothing to, and we would wonder, why is everyone staring at us? What is the thing
[Guest]: exactly? So then we realized that to get stared at in Delhi by men, and by not one man, it's
[Guest]: not like, it's like if you're at a bus stop, suddenly you're getting stared at by several
[Guest]: sets of men. And you realize that it was because you're a woman, it's because you're female,
[Guest]: that's it. So the idea that if you're female and out on the road, and you, you know, they're
[Guest]: speculating about what you're doing there, you're not expected to be there. And I know
[Guest]: that for men, they didn't realize this at all, you know, because when my partner and
[Guest]: I first, you know, got, we were colleagues together, comrades together. So we would have
[Guest]: to, you know, travel here and there. So we'd be at a bus stop, say around 9 at night, right
[Guest]: near the ISBT bus stand or something. And he would get increasingly uncomfortable because
[Guest]: he'd realized that somebody's staring, somebody else is staring, somebody else is staring.
[Guest]: And you know, he asked me what to do. I said, look, what's the point? If I confront one
[Guest]: guy, there are all the other guys, I don't want to confront so many and have so much
[Guest]: chodo, ignore. So then he's like, why exactly do you think they're looking like that? I
[Guest]: said, they're looking because I fit their box of female, that's it. Look at the bus
[Guest]: stop, how few women there are. I'm one of the only women sitting there. And so they
[Guest]: think this is weird. This is strange. They're not able to put me in whatever box of, you
[Guest]: know, I'm a young woman and a young woman student. So they can't put me in the box of
[Guest]: oh, she looks like someone's wife. She looks like someone's, you know, whatever. So, and
[Guest]: she's out here at night. So, you know, and then police people would come. If the bus
[Guest]: stop didn't have too many people on it, then you'd have a police guy come up and say to
[Guest]: him, aap kya kar rahe hain inke saath? Basically suspecting, are you a prostitute? What are
[Guest]: you? You know, because otherwise, why would you be out at night? The idea that you might
[Guest]: be a student, you might be an activist, you may be visiting Delhi University, and then
[Guest]: going back to JNU, taking a bus from the ISBT bus adda, this was incomprehensible, even
[Guest]: to the cops.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the story really speaks to me, because I think, you know, what your partner kind
[Amit Varma]: of figured out at that bus stop is something I've gone through as well, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: there are things we take for granted, which is this extra layer of awareness, which women
[Amit Varma]: have, which is normal to them. And most men are unaware of it, like you said, and men
[Amit Varma]: are fortunate enough that we can go out on the night and not have to worry about who's
[Amit Varma]: looking at us or whatever, we can enter a lift and not have to worry about who's there.
[Amit Varma]: And that extra layer is something that at some point, I guess, you begin to become aware
[Amit Varma]: of till then you just take it for granted. When did you become aware of that extra layer?
[Guest]: In Bhilai itself, in Bhilai, as I grew up, you know, as I entered my teens, I think Bhilai
[Guest]: also probably underwent a little bit of change, or maybe as little children, we didn't really
[Guest]: realize it. But gradually, I became aware of it. I'll tell you when, actually, I was
[Guest]: quite young, even then, I was still a child. But my mother had started going out to work.
[Guest]: So initially, she had not found a job. But then she did find a job, she started teaching.
[Guest]: So she used to take a cycle and head out. And she used to leave us alone at, we were
[Guest]: latchkey kids, my sister and I, so we'd go to school, come back, you know, feed ourselves
[Guest]: and she'd be out. But then she got a stalker. So somebody in a car, whom she later realized
[Guest]: was the son of a big industrialist there. So he was, you know, this quite, quite well
[Guest]: known industrialist in that area. In fact, even now, I'm stopping myself from naming
[Guest]: him and from saying even his car number, which we all remember by heart, because that family,
[Guest]: my mother still lives in Billai and that family is still, I mean, it is an influential family
[Guest]: still. So she got the stalker, this man in a car who would, she suddenly realized he's
[Guest]: hanging out, he's following her wherever she goes. So initially, she ignored it, then she
[Guest]: started getting scared, then she really got freaked out. Because one day, okay, he would
[Guest]: make blank calls to the house all the time. So, you know, there were the phones, you know,
[Guest]: the old sort of black phones, but also these were steel plant phones, Billai Steel Plant,
[Guest]: right? So they were basically, you know, you could connect to a steel plant operator also
[Guest]: if you wanted and all of that. You know, so he must have found it easy to figure out the
[Guest]: number and he would keep making calls. And my mother was worried that the children, we
[Guest]: would pick it up, her daughters would pick it up. For herself, she was, you know, kind
[Guest]: of confident that she'd deal with it. But then she really lost her nerve when one day
[Guest]: she just, you know, the doorbell rang, she opened the door and this man was standing
[Guest]: in front. And she totally freaked out because she felt that if we were alone at home. So
[Guest]: I think that that point I remember as a change. I don't remember exactly how old I was, maybe
[Guest]: 13 or so. But she, I remember that that was a time when she felt that her fear communicated
[Guest]: to us. So her, you know, so we then she would start telling us that you can't open the door.
[Guest]: Even if someone says, I'm your father's friend, I'm your mother's friend, tell them, uncle,
[Guest]: auntie, we are very sorry, but we have been told not to open the door. So I'm sorry, we're
[Guest]: being rude, but we can't open the door to anyone. And that was the first time in Bilai
[Guest]: that we had thought of that because we used to leave the door unlatched and stuff and
[Guest]: not really think twice. Then that guy actually ran her into a sort of concrete gutter once
[Guest]: near our house. So she was coming back on the cycle. And since he came so close to her
[Guest]: on the cycle, she panicked and had to get off the road and she fell. So she came back
[Guest]: to the house all, you know, scraped, bruised, not badly hurt, but really, really badly mentally
[Guest]: freaked out. So she was in tears and she was shaking. And I remember my father looking
[Guest]: very horrified and helpless and not knowing what to say what to do. And then our cat came
[Guest]: and sat in her lap and, you know, she started crying even more. And we didn't know what
[Guest]: to say. Then I then I remember hearing my parents talk about this. My sister was very
[Guest]: young at that time, but I could understand what was being. So I remember my parents talking
[Guest]: and finally deciding, no, we cannot complain. We cannot do anything because the police won't
[Guest]: act against this guy. And how will we prove anything? And what if he gets more vindictive
[Guest]: towards the children? So then they just became more protective. They started having a very
[Guest]: lovely neighbor of mine. Sort of we were told not to go to our place, but to go to her place.
[Guest]: So we would have lunch there when we came back from school. And then my mother would
[Guest]: collect us, things like that. I think that was the time probably when I realized that
[Guest]: this is, you know, the world we live in is not safe. After that, of course, there were
[Guest]: any number of such instances in Bhilai where we realized that to be female and out on the
[Guest]: road is something and not just in terms of safety. I think also in terms of the way you
[Guest]: hold yourself right in public. So I think for a long time, my mother, quite remarkably
[Guest]: actually to think about it, held herself and encouraged us to hold ourselves without really
[Guest]: remembering that we are female. So we didn't, you know, we weren't, you know, how we hold
[Guest]: ourselves, how we sit, how we laugh, what we do. We didn't really think much about it.
[Guest]: And my parents, I think, had a very big role to play in that because I, in retrospect,
[Guest]: now I look at society and I realize that maybe other girls were not as, even in Bhilai, were
[Guest]: certainly not as lucky as I was. I knew that my women, my girl friends, as in school friends,
[Guest]: they, and my sister's friends, they all thought of my mother as one of their friends. So they
[Guest]: would keep telling me that, you know, they'd keep talking about, you know, secret plans
[Guest]: we'd be making. And they'd say, aur kisi ko nahi bata sakte hain, aunty ko bata sakte
[Guest]: hain, Lakshmi aunty ko bata sakte hain, because they knew that this one is at heart, you know,
[Guest]: she's not going to chugli karo to their parents. So they didn't think of her as part of the,
[Guest]: you know, authority figures. And I never realized how lucky I was in that, actually. I realized
[Guest]: that later, because it was only probably when I came to Delhi that I began to fully realize
[Guest]: that being a woman, it's not just about physical safety. It's about the fact that you are seen
[Guest]: as though you have no business out in public. Kar kya rahe ho yahan pe? Mane you are not
[Guest]: supposed to, you're supposed to account for yourself in public. You have to show that
[Guest]: I have a good purpose, that I'm not immoral or whatever it is, you know. And even if it
[Guest]: is unsafe, I'll have to explain, oh, it's unsafe, why are you out here? So the fact
[Guest]: that I'll keep on having to explain my presence, I think I never had to do that much to my
[Guest]: parents, you know. The only instance I remember, there was one instance when my mother lost
[Guest]: her nerve a bit vis-a-vis me. That was one time when I had joined some karate class or
[Guest]: something. So I used to do it just for exercise, kicks. So once, I usually used to get a lift
[Guest]: back home with one person who would drop me on his cycle. That day, somehow he didn't
[Guest]: turn up and I decided to have a leisurely walk home. So I walked home, and it's quite
[Guest]: away from my home, but I walked. And it was evening, so around 7.30, it was dark. And
[Guest]: as I, about halfway home, I realized I spotted my parents on the scooter going in the opposite
[Guest]: direction. So I tried to call out to them, but they didn't see. So I thought, oh, well,
[Guest]: and I walked home. As soon as I got home, my grandmother was at home then, and she came
[Guest]: out looking very horrified and came and hugged me and said, come, come, come. So I said,
[Guest]: what happened? So then she realized and she said, no, no, sit, sit, sit. And when your
[Guest]: parents come, if your mother gets angry, don't react immediately. You know, she told me,
[Guest]: don't be angry. So then my parents came home. The minute they opened the gate, my mother
[Guest]: saw me and freaked out. She said, you're not going anywhere ever again and this and that
[Guest]: and that and what. And that was so unlike her because she thought I was late and something
[Guest]: had happened to me and they'd gone to look for me. So I said, but I saw you people and
[Guest]: I was walking back and it was fine and we always walk and come on and all of that. But
[Guest]: somewhere in her brain, she had gotten a fear, right? So she did. She suddenly became the,
[Guest]: you know, the authority figure mother saying, kuch nahi kal se, sab bandh and all of that.
[Guest]: So I was getting angry. Then my dad also came and told me, he said, don't say a word right
[Guest]: now. Just relax now. We are very happy that nothing happened and you were not scared.
[Guest]: We were scared. No, that's okay. You were not scared. You were enjoying your walk home.
[Guest]: So now let your mother get over her fear. You know, she's had a very bad shock. So let
[Guest]: her get over it. And of course, she never repeated that ever again. I happily went next
[Guest]: evening also, no problem. But yeah. Yeah, your parents sound so remarkable. A couple
[Amit Varma]: of threads to untangle there. But before that, a quick question. I'm just curious that when
[Amit Varma]: the bell rang and she opened the door and it was that guy, what happened then? What
[Guest]: did he say? What happened? She says he just stood there and said nothing. And she, you
[Guest]: know, she was terrified, absolutely. But she just sort of shut the door and bolted it,
[Guest]: locked it and just sat inside. And after a while, she looked out of the window and he
[Guest]: was gone. But she just freaked out. I mean, she didn't say or do anything. And she did
[Guest]: think, she said, should I make a call? Should I call the police? Who should I call? And
[Guest]: she then decided not to. And I see that, you know, all the time now, when I think about
[Guest]: women weighing in, whether they want to complain about something, especially stalking. I wrote
[Guest]: about this sometime in 2013, when one woman had come to one of the meetings we were having
[Guest]: during the Nirbhaya wala movement. I don't like calling it that, but it was the anti-rape
[Guest]: movement. So this woman had come from quite a way. I think she was in Mangolpuri or someplace
[Guest]: quite far away from central Delhi. She'd come all the way to the meeting because she'd heard
[Guest]: about it from someone who worked with her. And the person who worked with her was a comrade
[Guest]: of ours, a trade union member. So he mentioned it and she came. Then she took me aside after
[Guest]: the meeting and told me she was being stalked. So I told her what do you want to do? And
[Guest]: she said, main itne din mujhe dar lag raha tha ki mere bachon ke kuch karega. So I didn't
[Guest]: want to complain. But now he's actually started following my kids around. And now I feel like
[Guest]: then what do I have to lose? I have to have to complain because I cannot risk something
[Guest]: happening to my children. And that kind of brought it alive again. And I remembered all
[Guest]: of this. And then I wrote about it and I realized that a lot of other women have gone through
[Guest]: this. And this fear of the consequences of your complaining, that other people, that
[Guest]: your family members might have to bear it, is a huge burden. A lot of people do not want
[Guest]: to take that burden. Look at what happened to the singer complainant. Her family members,
[Guest]: so many of them were killed as a result. Or look at Ruchira, I think her name was Ruchira
[Guest]: Girotra, right? The child in, you know, the tennis player in, I think it was Gurgaon or
[Guest]: something. Some years ago, she complained against a police officer who had been sexually
[Guest]: harassing her at the tennis club or something. And they made her life and her brother's life
[Guest]: and her parents' life a living hell. So at the end of it, she committed suicide, Ruchira
[Guest]: Girotra.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember that now comes to mind. Yeah. Yeah. I was struck by something you said and
[Amit Varma]: this is leading on to my next question. You know, I teach a writing class, an online writing
[Amit Varma]: course and there one of the things that I tell the participants is that always look
[Amit Varma]: for concrete details, which can make whatever you're writing about vivid. And you just did
[Amit Varma]: that when you were talking about your mother and how she's come home and she's upset and
[Amit Varma]: you said, the cat crawled onto her lap and she started crying, which is so concrete and
[Amit Varma]: just makes it so real. So my question here is your mother, of course, taught literature.
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken in the past about how you were surrounded by books at home and they were
[Amit Varma]: in a sense a window to the world like at, you know, in some other interview of yours,
[Amit Varma]: you've written about how, you know, even though those were homophobic times, that didn't affect
[Amit Varma]: your attitude, because you had those books, that was your kind of window to the world
[Amit Varma]: and you could sort of get a lot from there. Tell me a little bit about you know, the kind
[Amit Varma]: of stuff you read, the writers you really liked, the writers who stayed with you and
[Amit Varma]: other books that kind of shaped you in that period and even later, which had a profound
[Amit Varma]: influence on you.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I've, I like to think about it because I read so indiscriminately. In
[Guest]: my house, you know, children's books and adult books were not really distinguished. Even
[Guest]: my mother and her sister and her brothers were not brought up that way. So apparently
[Guest]: they never really had children's books, you know, brought for them and all of that. Books
[Guest]: were there, all kinds of books and people just read them. So it was like that for me.
[Guest]: So I knew that we read a lot of Enid Blyton, for instance. Okay, so that's something everyone
[Guest]: reads, we also read. But I think about it now when I think about what you take away
[Guest]: from there, right? So the thing is, there's a lot of now in the UK and other places that
[Guest]: are even moved to say ban Enid Blyton or do a sanitizing of her books because she uses
[Guest]: very racist language here and there. Okay, extremely racist language and racist portrayal
[Guest]: of some characters. Definitely colonial, you know, if you look at any Indian character
[Guest]: in her books, they are a ridiculous kind of thing, you know, somebody, it's not even an
[Guest]: Indian character, but somebody acting as an Indian student or something, it's ridiculous.
[Guest]: But and of course, it's, you know, it's obsessed by the idea of gender rules, right? Because
[Guest]: it's always about, oh, you know, this girl can't do anything because she's a girl and
[Guest]: who's girlish and who's boyish and all of that. The thing is that I think about what
[Guest]: I was getting when I read that stuff. To me, the most interesting character was not the
[Guest]: ones who were, you know, obeying the rules. The one whom the writer made most interesting
[Guest]: was the one who was breaking the rules. So you always, you know, the tomboy character
[Guest]: was the interesting one. You know, even in, you know, Little Women, you know, Louisa May
[Guest]: Alcott's. It is Jo who's your heroine because she's the one who's actually not the little
[Guest]: woman as such. She's not in the mold of women as they were meant to be. So I am not really,
[Guest]: I have, you know, when I look back now, I feel like saying, don't tell your children,
[Guest]: you don't read this, don't read that. Let them read everything. I read a lot of Reader's
[Guest]: Digest for lack of anything, because I was so voracious. So I wanted a continuous supply
[Guest]: of stuff to read. I read a lot of Reader's Digest. Well, here I'm sitting in front of
[Guest]: you card carrying communists. The whole Reader's Digest was a propaganda against communism.
[Guest]: Okay. They had such, it was a very, very propagandist magazine. Okay. But what do I remember from
[Guest]: what I read of it? I remember that they used to carry these books. They would carry full
[Guest]: book length stories, maybe slightly abridged. So they had stuff from the Second World War
[Guest]: about people kind of escaping from the Nazis and, you know, what the Nazis did and all
[Guest]: of that. Now, I remember all of that. All of that gave a very vivid memory to me. And
[Guest]: so when I started looking around my own reality and figuring out, oh, these guys are behaving
[Guest]: exactly like those Nazis. So that was an easy thing for me. I didn't get the anti-American,
[Guest]: anti-Russia propaganda and anti-Soviet propaganda and anti-communist propaganda didn't really
[Guest]: penetrate that much, you know. Of course, there was a lot of Russian, anti-US propaganda,
[Guest]: which I also read because they were the People's, was it the People's Publishing House? Basically
[Guest]: the Soviet literature. So they would have these camps and lovely books of all kinds,
[Guest]: especially for children and especially science books and all, which were great. And so my
[Guest]: parents actually learned Russian. So they were many Russians in Bilay. So they would
[Guest]: learn Russian and interact a lot with Russians. They had several good friends. But they would
[Guest]: laugh at the stories they were being taught because they were being taught stories about
[Guest]: people escaping from the U.S. to go to the Soviet Union and say, oh, we are in paradise.
[Guest]: And the Reader's Digest would have stories which were the opposite, right? People escaping
[Guest]: from, you know, Soviet Russia or East Germany or whatever it is and finding freedom in the
[Guest]: West and all of that. So my parents would make a lot of jokes about this, you know.
[Guest]: So I think it was their treatment of literature that it's, or any reading, that this is not
[Guest]: something that you're not just swallowing and believing, that you're actually engaging
[Guest]: with it. You can laugh at it. You can argue about it. You can think about it. That was
[Guest]: more of the approach. So in terms of books, I think one book which I accidentally picked
[Guest]: up and read was actually the, you know, I read and re-read and re-read it so often.
[Guest]: And I was very young when I first picked it up. The front page was missing. So I didn't
[Guest]: know what book it was. I just started reading. It turned out to be To Kill a Mockingbird.
[Guest]: I had no idea. I must have been about 10 maybe or 11, not more than that. So I began reading
[Guest]: and I had no idea, you know, when they were discussing rape, I had no idea what they meant
[Guest]: exactly because I didn't quite know the dynamics of what was going on. So I wasn't much better
[Guest]: off than Scout when she's asking, you know, what exactly is happening here? What's rape?
[Guest]: You know, so carnal knowledge of a woman without her consent. What, what, what is carnal? I
[Guest]: didn't know, but I couldn't put the book down. And I felt the sense of a tremendous injustice
[Guest]: of various kinds and felt very, very moved by it. And then I figured out later, I remember
[Guest]: I picked this up at my grandparents' house in Coonoor. So I, I figured out that it was
[Guest]: called To Kill a Mockingbird because then I asked my mother and all of that. And then
[Guest]: she said, yes, I think this is that one. So that I went back to several times. And I think
[Guest]: that in a sense, you know, making the connection with biases in our society and, you know,
[Guest]: communal biases, caste biases. I think that was a very, very formative kind of book, which
[Guest]: made a big difference. And then a lot of, you know, short stories and things like, like
[Guest]: Kate Chopin. So her writing. So this was also stuff I just discovered accidentally, you
[Guest]: know, I would find it lying in the, at the back shelf in Coonoor or in Vilai, somewhere
[Guest]: at the back and just pull it out and say, okay, book I haven't read yet. So I'd read
[Guest]: it. And I realized that it's a book about a, you know, I was reading The Awakening where
[Guest]: it's this woman who eventually, you know, leaves her marriage. So I was reading stuff
[Guest]: like that without, you know, without a censor and really feeling moved. You know, I would
[Guest]: live with these characters for a long time. And I was, as I said, I read anything and
[Guest]: everything. So I was reading Max Birbaum and James Thurber in Coonoor. Again, just finding
[Guest]: the books, reading them. And then in my school in Vilai, when I went to class, you know,
[Guest]: ninth and 10th, I realized that my classes are boring me. Okay. I had to somehow pass
[Guest]: mathematics, which have terrified me and maths and science had become a burden and found
[Guest]: it very hard. But my English classes and, you know, social science classes had become
[Guest]: boring because, you know, I could make out the mistakes that the, you know, teacher is
[Guest]: making and I couldn't bear what they were doing with poetry and reading in class. So
[Guest]: I realized that what I would instead do was to go to the school library on time, pick
[Guest]: up something to read and read it under my desk in my book so they will know what I'm
[Guest]: reading. So I read a lot of Dostoevsky because they had these old Soviet publications of
[Guest]: crime and punishment there. So I read Crime and Punishment as though it was a detective
[Guest]: novel. Okay. So here I am waiting with bated breath. Oh, my God, poor guy. And then I'd
[Guest]: imagine, my God, suppose I end up killing somebody one day, then what will I live with?
[Guest]: I'll keep on thinking. Even if no one catches me, I'll be feeling guilty. I'll be feeling
[Guest]: guilty. So I really felt it. Then I found a book by very irrelevant, Leaves in the Forest.
[Guest]: So that I read. I had no idea who's very irrelevant. I just found the book, read it and I was fascinated
[Guest]: by it because they meet Gandhi. So he mentions meeting Gandhi and he meets C.F. Andrews.
[Guest]: So C.F. Andrews talks about Gandhi. So, and it's very funny because they are cocking a
[Guest]: snook at the priesthood, you know, because the priesthood doesn't want them joining,
[Guest]: you know, the British priests don't want these guys joining, supporting the freedom movement
[Guest]: or supporting Adivasis, you know, Goan Adivasis living their lives in their own way. And,
[Guest]: you know, that I found was fascinating to me. So I had a sort of weird, eclectic kind
[Guest]: of exposure of this kind.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, this is this is kind of nuts, because like when I was a kid, first of all, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the books you're naming are sort of familiar to me, the books and authors, because obviously,
[Amit Varma]: in India, you only got so much back in the day. So it was pretty much a staple, you're
[Amit Varma]: going to read your Ennard Blyton and Hardy Boys and all of that. And I like the Mallory
[Unknown]: Towers series a lot back when I was a kid, I remember, especially the Tomboys. So we
[Amit Varma]: have something in common there. And what kind of gave me, somewhat startled me was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my sort of gateway into serious literature was when I picked up Dostoevsky's
[Amit Varma]: House of the Dead, because I thought, oh, it's going to be a thriller kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I was 10. And I absolutely just fell into it and just read everything by him. Now, on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, it seems to me that, you know, we can complain that there were so few books
[Amit Varma]: available. So which is why, you know, you and I basically read the same kind of things.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we were indiscriminate, because you got hold of whatever you could, and today
[Amit Varma]: everything is available. But on the other hand, we were enormously lucky and privileged,
[Amit Varma]: because we did read a lot. And I say this in the context of seeing a little bit outside
[Amit Varma]: the world that we are in, like, you know, I'm sort of struck by in one of your interviews,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about how you went to Shaheen Bagh, when that happened. And a question that you
[Amit Varma]: like to ask all the women gathered there was that, quote, you're afraid of many things,
[Amit Varma]: but tell me, are you having fun? Stop quote. And the reason this is significant is that
[Amit Varma]: because they'd have this newfound sense of solidarity from being part of a women's movement.
[Amit Varma]: And what is happening here, it seems to me is that, you know, some of them at least are
[Amit Varma]: getting a glimpse of a world that they didn't really know existed or could never have experienced.
[Amit Varma]: There's a sociologist called Timur Kuran, who wrote this book called Private Truths
[Amit Varma]: Public Lies in 1999, where he essentially spoke about how many of us will often put
[Amit Varma]: on a face, which is a lie, because we think that that's what everyone else around us thinks.
[Amit Varma]: For example, before the Soviet Union collapse, the example he gave was that nobody would
[Amit Varma]: express anything against the Soviet Union, because my God, and they thought they were
[Amit Varma]: the only rebellious people. And then suddenly, one day, they realized that there are other
[Amit Varma]: people like them. And that leads to what he calls a preference cascade, when they see
[Amit Varma]: that there are others like them. And boom, it seems it feels like it happened overnight,
[Amit Varma]: but they all felt that way secretly all the way through. Now, I think for us, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of that awareness can happen through reading that awareness can happen through, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the privileges that we have. But for most people, that simply isn't there. Like it isn't
[Amit Varma]: the case, I would imagine that most women in India are happy with the patriarchy, and
[Amit Varma]: yet they are not speaking out against it, you would imagine. So now do you think that
[Amit Varma]: in this kind of modern age, where you are sort of surrounded by different kinds of social
[Amit Varma]: media, where you know, people like you have much more of a voice than you would have,
[Amit Varma]: say, maybe in in the year 2000? You know, that there is a chance of a preference cascade
[Amit Varma]: in this direction also happening, that could then lead to sort of an acceleration of the
[Amit Varma]: kind of change we'd all want to see?
[Guest]: Yes, and no both. I think that yes, in the sense that yes, you can see it happening among
[Guest]: young women, right? So even this whole pinjra tod phenomenon. So it's a it's a movement
[Guest]: on the ground. But it also has a way of communication and spreading through social media. People
[Guest]: get to know about it, and then they want to do their own unit of it and all of that, right?
[Guest]: So I think that it is something which has helped, of course, the internet has helped.
[Guest]: And people get more, you know, they're exposed to a whole range of books or ideas or through
[Guest]: other means, you know, it's not just through reading, it's also talking, listening, whatever,
[Guest]: you know, they're hearing talks, they're hearing whatever. But at the same time, I think that
[Guest]: there's a lot of there's a big digital divide also. So I see that there is a change happening
[Guest]: in young women in rural India, or semi-rural India. I can see that happening when I visit,
[Guest]: I can see it happening when, you know, there are young women there who are studying, so
[Guest]: they're craving for new experiences. They are full of ideas. And it's not just young
[Guest]: women, for that matter, even young boys, okay, they are full of questions. And if you just
[Guest]: happen to be visiting their home, it's like they won't let you sleep at night because
[Guest]: they want to surround you and keep asking you stuff because they are not getting the
[Guest]: answers they want. And they are looking for answers beyond the town or the village in
[Guest]: which they live, right? And I would ask them, if they're asking a lot of questions about
[Guest]: Indian society, and so I would ask them,
[Guest]: Aap log TV pe kya dekhte hain? Ravish ko nahi sunte kya? Because I would tell them, Ravish
[Guest]: addresses this issue on that show. They wouldn't have heard of him. This was some years back,
[Guest]: I remember, in Bihar. They hadn't heard of him, although Ravish is from Bihar. So I'd
[Guest]: say, so what do you get on TV? What are you watching? They said, arre jo free mein channel
[Guest]: aata hai, wohi toh dekhte hain. Aur free mein channel jo aata hai, woh Deepak Chaurasia,
[Guest]: woh ye. So ye cheezein toh aati nahi, humaar dimaag mein ye baatein aati hain. And we don't
[Guest]: know where to get the answer for it. And I realised that they are not that keen on reading,
[Guest]: okay? Especially reading stuff which is written in the usual sort of, you know, political
[Guest]: patrika style. They're not really readers of that kind now. They are willing to read
[Guest]: literature, they're willing to read poetry, but in terms of a political polemic, they
[Guest]: may or may not. Whereas they really want to listen, they want to interact, you know, they
[Guest]: want to get the sense that they are asking something and able to argue and all of that.
[Guest]: And I think those experiences are, we still don't realise how precious they are and how
[Guest]: little we are able to create of that for most, for the large majority of our youngsters.
[Guest]: And that's why when they manage to come from rural, if they manage to make it through school
[Guest]: and come to university or college, that is the point at which the world is opening up.
[Guest]: And that is the point at which they feel alright, now, you know, this is where suddenly, I have
[Guest]: the chance to listen to so much more, know so much more and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and this kind of tells you that there are, you know, people use phrases like malnourished,
[Amit Varma]: there are multiple kinds of malnourishment that not having information, not knowing about
[Amit Varma]: the world is itself one such thing. And were you ever into TikTok by any chance?
[Guest]: Not at all. In fact, I'm very old fashioned that way. I was dragged kicking and screaming
[Guest]: onto Facebook and Twitter later. But even now, I look even at something like Spaces
[Guest]: and say, I haven't been there yet. I have no idea what it is.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I wish before it was banned, you'd check TikTok out because I just fell in love
[Amit Varma]: with it. And in fact, I taught a very brief online course on TikTok and Indian society
[Amit Varma]: before it got banned. And I thought that it getting banned was tragic. Because what you're
[Amit Varma]: speaking of, you would see glimpses of it there like TikTok was a one app, which was
[Amit Varma]: for rural India, which was for people left untouched by this. I mean, of course, city
[Amit Varma]: kids also used it and all of that. But there was such an explosion of new and different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of creativity with people using TikTok in all our villages and towns, especially,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I especially noticed this among people of alternate sexualities, for whom suddenly
[Amit Varma]: you have all these creators of alternate sexualities creating incredible content. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and then that was leading to some kind of a cascade where more and more creators like
[Amit Varma]: that were coming up because they had new role models, which is very far away from the nonsense
[Amit Varma]: that you see in our, you know, mainstream film industries. And another of the things
[Amit Varma]: I noticed is that in many of those, you know, when it comes to romance, you see the woman
[Amit Varma]: making the first move. And there was just this whole new kind of language happening
[Guest]: and that's fantastic. Yeah, yeah. So I really wish that you had seen it, but and that the
[Guest]: bandit is just, I've heard people speaking about it, but yeah, I didn't see much of it
[Guest]: myself. I've seen bits of it shared here and there. And I did think that, you know, people
[Guest]: are getting some control over their own, you know, some kind of space of their own to express
[Guest]: and all of that. So it's very sad. Yeah, that that is shut down.
[Amit Varma]: And it was evolving, you had very interesting kinds of descent also, which, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: art in, in creative ways, which you wouldn't really see in any other media. So it is what
[Amit Varma]: it is. Let's let's kind of go back to sort of growing up process. You're a kid in Bhilai.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually you landed up in Mumbai at St. Xavier's. And then you went and did your
[Amit Varma]: MPhil in JNU. Tell me about your sort of evolving conception of yourself in these times. Like,
[Amit Varma]: what did you see yourself as? What did you see yourself doing? How were your interests
[Amit Varma]: kind of developing and growing? And are there other directions that you could possibly have
[Amit Varma]: taken? Had you not taken this one? Like, how big a role does happenstance play in where
[Amit Varma]: we land up?
[Guest]: I think a very big role happenstance is what I would I think, what I am today is sort of
[Guest]: in spite of myself, I say that it's not, it's not only happenstance, it's about my overcoming
[Guest]: my own self, my own resistance. Because I, I had thought that I would study literature,
[Guest]: I might teach literature, I might be a journalist, these were possibilities that had occurred
[Guest]: to me and that I had thought about and felt comfortable with. In Bhilai, anybody who didn't
[Guest]: study science or who didn't do either the IIT ki tayyari or MBBS ki tayyari, basically
[Guest]: were considered dropouts. So everyone in, teachers were shocked that, teachers who didn't
[Guest]: know me well, there were a couple of teachers who knew what I really was. And they had told
[Guest]: my parents when I was in the eighth standard, don't force her into these directions. That
[Guest]: is not what she wants to do. So the thing was that then, you know, the arts wale jo
[Guest]: bachche the, they were considered to be, oh, you know, so everybody's shocked, you know,
[Guest]: why are you opting for that? And then there was a pressure that, okay, if you're opting
[Guest]: for that, you must be wanting to prepare for the IAS. So then my mother also would tell
[Guest]: me, do you think you want to, everybody's saying it, what is it about? So once when
[Guest]: I visited Delhi, my aunt who lived in Delhi at that time, she was a very wonderful woman,
[Guest]: she's no more. So she was a very gregarious, very social person, not me. I was a very private
[Guest]: person, very private, always with a few select friends, not interested in meeting everyone,
[Guest]: talking to everyone. And she was the opposite. And she told me that, I don't think you're
[Guest]: going to like this. So she said, look, if you want, I have a friend who's an IAS officer,
[Guest]: and I will take you and you can sit outside her door, watch what she does in the day and
[Guest]: tell me, do you really see yourself doing that? And I didn't do that eventually, I didn't
[Guest]: go and observe. But in talking to her, I realized that no, I wasn't really at all interested
[Guest]: in that. So I said, I don't think that's me at all. I'm not a very good organizer, certainly
[Guest]: not an administrator, not that kind of an authority figure. That's not my thing. Plus,
[Guest]: you know, people dealing is not my best strength is what I thought at that time. So I remained
[Guest]: my private little self with a few very good friends in Bombay, but very few and, you know,
[Guest]: very, very close, but very few. But in, I was very, very concerned in Bombay by the
[Guest]: communal violence that happened in 92, 93. So that I was in Bombay when the Babri Masjid
[Guest]: came down, I was in Bombay when the riots happened, and when the blasts happened. And
[Guest]: that stuff did leave a big, big impact on me, because I had friends, older friends,
[Guest]: who were journalists. So they would drop in in the college. So they were formerly from
[Guest]: the college. So they would drop in, talk to, there was a group of us. So there was teachers,
[Guest]: students, and there was a place called the Social Science Center, the Social Science
[Guest]: Center. And we used to hang out in the San Xavier Social Science Center, where I used
[Guest]: to help out as a librarian with the books and stuff there, me and my friend. So there
[Guest]: people would come and describe that we are journalists, and we've seen police killing
[Guest]: Muslims running away. And, you know, these are not all stories that we are being allowed
[Guest]: to print even. So these were journalists with publications, good publications, like the
[Guest]: Times of India and all, very deeply disturbed by what they were seeing, not able to report
[Guest]: on all of that. So I knew that this was an anti-Muslim pogrom that was happening. I knew
[Guest]: that one of my closest friends, who's still my best friend now, so I would visit her house
[Guest]: all the time in Bombay. She was a Bombaywali. And her parents, her mother, I would meet
[Guest]: her mother, and her mother would tell me, you know, stuff she had heard, which was all
[Guest]: myths, okay, that, oh, Matunga, there's this big sari store, and it's been burned down
[Guest]: by the Muslims. So I would store this information away, my friend and I would store it away,
[Guest]: then actually ask someone to check, and then come back, you know, do our own fact check,
[Guest]: basically, and come back and say, no, it's standing. Ask so and so. They're telling you
[Guest]: the damn thing is standing. This is a lie. Okay. So you're being told these lies by the
[Guest]: local Shiv Senics and the local RSS people. So the thing was, you could see this happening
[Guest]: and it was deeply disturbing. I think most disturbing also because of the stuff that
[Guest]: was being said at that time, by these groups about women, right? So I could, I had no trouble
[Guest]: at all connecting it with all the stuff I'd read about Nazis. It was instant. So because,
[Guest]: and I would feel totally indignant because it was totally smothering to think about these
[Guest]: people marching on the streets, sort of owning the streets. And immediately you realize that,
[Guest]: you know, as somebody who was so comfortable in Bombay, but when your rioters are in possession
[Guest]: of the streets, it becomes a very different thing because then you are seen as someone
[Guest]: who could be a target if they didn't like what you said or did or wore or whatever,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Another very formative thing I should mention actually is that was Xavier's itself. I mean,
[Guest]: that was a big point, not in terms of activism. I think the people I knew who later became
[Guest]: activists there didn't think of me as being a potential activist. Okay. So even people
[Guest]: like Arun Ferreira, who's now in prison, Bhima Koregaon, he and several others at that time,
[Guest]: they were activists. And I don't think they, you know, I'd hang out with them all the time,
[Guest]: but I don't think they really saw me as activist material as such. But in college, my English
[Guest]: literature classes, so there was this teacher called Eunice de Souza, who was absolutely
[Guest]: the most remarkable teacher and poet. You've heard of her, I'm sure. So her classes and
[Guest]: her, especially when she taught us, I remember the awakening I had when she taught the war
[Guest]: poets, basically the First World War British poets. So that was anti-war poetry, basically.
[Guest]: Or even if it wasn't anti-war, it was by people who were fighting the war, who were soldiers,
[Guest]: who thought they were good British soldiers. So they were not, you know, they were not
[Guest]: dropping out as soldiers. They were not deserting the army. But they were writing about what
[Guest]: they saw, and they were expressing their loss of illusions about what war was, and their
[Guest]: extreme discomfort with the patriotic jingoism about soldiers and giving themselves up for
[Guest]: the nation and all of that. And I know that that was the point at which I sort of stopped.
[Guest]: As a child, I always used to stand up for the national anthem. If it played on TV or
[Guest]: radio, you know, there I was. But at that point, I started wondering whether I wanted
[Guest]: to do that every time or not. I remember thinking that I need to be thinking about this, what
[Guest]: this means. And definitely the ideas about war and nation and all of that were very badly
[Guest]: shaken up once. So that was, I mean, that was also formative in ways which I didn't
[Guest]: realize at that time, probably. But they were formative in the sense that when I saw army
[Guest]: out on the streets in Bombay, so they came to very belatedly to control the riots. The
[Guest]: riots, I'd already seen curfews, curfew-ridden streets. I knew, I'd seen VT station full
[Guest]: of Muslims who were fleeing. So I knew that stuff was happening. And then there was the
[Guest]: army. And I remember, you know, walking out on the streets when the army was doing a,
[Guest]: you know, basically the army vehicles were moving. And you would have thought that the
[Guest]: army has come to bring order, right? And in a way they did. But the men in the army, you
[Guest]: know, the ones who were in that, in those vehicles, young men in uniform, their presence
[Guest]: on the street was quite frightening to me as a woman, I remember. Because they would
[Guest]: be shouting from those, you know, their vehicles, they would be shouting, you know, lewd abuse
[Guest]: and stuff like that. And it was not something you were particularly used to in Bombay, I
[Guest]: can tell you that, you know, because, and it didn't feel, and to my mind, I mean, I
[Guest]: was not at all comfortable with what that represented either. Because it felt as though
[Guest]: the city had become a very alien kind of place, you know. So the city which I, I still love
[Guest]: Bombay. I still, I cannot, it's a love that doesn't go away because it's the place where
[Guest]: I first became an adult. And I love that place. But I know that that sense of discomfort,
[Guest]: you know, Anand Patwardhan's film Ram Ke Naam. So Ram Ke Naam has a scene right at the end
[Guest]: where he's filming a march that is for secularism. And that reaches near Flora Fountain, I think
[Guest]: it is some such place near, I think it's Churchgate or Flora Fountain, somewhere there. And there's
[Guest]: a stone pelting by the, by the Shiv Senex and Hindutva right wing people. So I, my friend
[Guest]: and I were in college. So our college was Xavier's. We walked down from there. And we
[Guest]: had another older friend with us who was a former student of the college and former student
[Guest]: of JNU also. So he had gone in a very big brotherly fashion with us, basically a little
[Guest]: protective. So we went and when this stone pelting started, this guy who had gone with
[Guest]: us started saying, I want you guys back. So he kind of persuaded us to, you know, turn
[Guest]: back. We didn't want to, but after hanging out for about 15 minutes in the middle of
[Guest]: the pelting stones, he said, no, if you're, and he looks at me and he said, tumhara saar
[Guest]: fatega toh you don't even have, like your parents aren't here or whatever. You're in
[Guest]: a hostel. Just, just come out of this now, you know, you've done your protesting now,
[Guest]: just come right back. So he became very parental and took us back very sweetly. But whenever
[Guest]: I see Ram Ke Naam and I see that, I think to myself, yes, I was there. That's good.
[Guest]: But that's all. I didn't do anything more in the name of activism. The rest happened
[Guest]: when I came to JNU for my MA.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's, that's actually very evocative. And it's very interesting. You know, I'm reminded
[Amit Varma]: of this book by Chyna Meeville called The City and the City, which is of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one city that is also, you know, there are two sort of simultaneous overlapping cities.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that that's also the case with Bombay, that it is actually so many different
[Amit Varma]: cities. I mean, the Bombay by night is so different from the Bombay by day. And these
[Amit Varma]: different versions also include alternate realities, like when that lady, you know,
[Amit Varma]: your friend's mom tells you that XYZ store has been burned down, and you find that XYZ
[Amit Varma]: store is still standing. It's like in a parallel universe, it's like the city divides into
[Amit Varma]: two, right? And one version of the city has XYZ store and in the other version of the
[Amit Varma]: story, it's ruined. And you have that alternate reality just coming through the ages and just
[Amit Varma]: shaping so many people who live in a city that we don't see and we live in a city that
[Amit Varma]: they don't see, which is, you know, kind of poignant in a sense. So, how did you then
[Amit Varma]: eventually, after all this, get into activism and then get into politics?
[Guest]: Yes, that is the part where the in spite of myself comes in because I came to JNU. So,
[Guest]: my same friend from Bombay, she and I got into JNU together, she in the German Studies
[Guest]: Center and me in English literature. So, we were very excited. We liked JNU. We didn't
[Guest]: like Delhi much, but we did like JNU. And we liked classes, teaching, all of that. But
[Guest]: JNU also has a lot of politics. And we were immediately interested as soon as we came.
[Guest]: So, we were immediately interested in figuring out who would we like to vote for. So, you
[Guest]: basically come to JNU in June, July, and elections happen. You basically come in July and your
[Guest]: elections happen in October. So, you don't have very long, you know, two, three months
[Guest]: to basically figure out your mind. It's you get a very short kind of crash course in what's
[Guest]: happening. And we found that interesting without being involved, right? So, we saw that, you
[Guest]: know, in 93, when we joined, then there was this new student, relatively new student organization
[Guest]: called ISA. We didn't know it was new. By the way, the first student organization which
[Guest]: contacted us was the ABVP. How? Because in the, actually, the letter we got from the
[Guest]: university telling us that you have got admission to JNU, so that in the official envelope,
[Guest]: there was a card by the ABVP signed by a woman who was an ABVP office bearer. Okay. And I
[Guest]: remember that when that, when I got that in Bhilai, and my friend got it in Bombay, both
[Guest]: of us had spoken on phone and said, what on earth? Because we knew that if we didn't know
[Guest]: anything else about politics, but we knew that the ABVP represented these right wing
[Guest]: fellows and we were like, what is this? Is this what is going to happen in JNU? These
[Guest]: guys are sending letters with the administration. But then we came and realized that they had
[Guest]: basically managed to find someone in the admin who had agreed to put this letter in for them
[Guest]: and it had become quite an issue and people had protested it and all. But then the main
[Guest]: jagda then was, of course, ABVP was there. And then there was the SFI, which was the
[Guest]: established large left organization and there was ISA. So, we eventually became very close
[Guest]: friends with some ISA women. And ISA had a lot of very strong women. And what clinched
[Guest]: it for us was that whether it was the ABVP or whether it was the more conservative left,
[Guest]: which was coming to us, they would both try to scare us off from the ISA feminists. Okay.
[Guest]: So they would both try to tell us that these women are. So that was an immediate clincher
[Guest]: for us. They were like, oh, really? There are these fallen women? Okay, where are they?
[Guest]: That sounds interesting. Let's go befriend them. So, we kind of really hit it off with
[Guest]: them because it was so clear that they were feminists and they were their lifelong friends
[Guest]: now. But I never thought of getting active with them at all. So, 94 happens and 94, I
[Guest]: voted for ISA. But 94 happens and in 94, you know, the ISA really tried to get me and my
[Guest]: friend and some other friends of mine to contest elections. And I resisted it like the dickens.
[Guest]: Okay. I really, I, because I could feel the pull. I could feel that I can do this, but
[Guest]: I felt tremendous fear because I felt like it'll just sweep me away. And everyone knew
[Guest]: that I'm the one who's kind of holding the others also back. Okay. Because we would go
[Guest]: file our nominations and then the next morning come and take them back. And the person who's
[Guest]: my partner, he was the secretary then. Very thrilled when suddenly five women have filed
[Guest]: nominations and next day, you know, four of them are taking it back. Very irritated he
[Guest]: was. Okay. And he's like, what on earth? And I hadn't taken membership of ISA either. And
[Guest]: I'm like, nahi, nahi, nahi, apni individuality rakhni hai aur sangathan ka part ho jaoge
[Guest]: toh. It's a pleasure. Mine, my ideas won't be mine. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. So, I
[Guest]: didn't contest. But I didn't contest. But in return, I promised to campaign for ISA.
[Guest]: And that was the first sense of a little shame. Because I was, in my school of languages,
[Guest]: I was taking around this group of the ISA candidates. So there are five councillor posts.
[Guest]: Had we contested, it would have been at least three women, if not four, and one guy. Okay.
[Guest]: This way it turned out to be all five guys. So every time, and the campaigners were all
[Guest]: women, articulate women, me, my friends, all were extremely. So we'd walk into a classroom
[Guest]: and these guys would introduce themselves. And some of us would also do the talking.
[Guest]: And in every class, there would be people asking, why is there no woman on the panel?
[Guest]: And what's wrong with ISA? And here you guys are. And these boys would give us the dirts.
[Guest]: Okay. Like saying, look, they're thinking it's our fault. And you people should have
[Guest]: been the candidates and you guys have made us contest. So we would really be like, kya
[Guest]: aap bataayen? Toh pehli baar thoda sharam laga. But uske baad bhi after that election
[Guest]: also. So in that election, this Shiv Sena guy was a candidate, Bharti Vidyarthi Sena.
[Guest]: So he made some horrible anti-Muslim speech. And then he came to our Ganga hostel mess
[Guest]: and made a very terrible, a long speech about how, about the Hindu Rashtra. So we had gone
[Guest]: in there and started sort of heckling him, asking him, what will you do with us? You
[Guest]: know, who don't think of ourselves as being Indian first or religion first. He said, you
[Guest]: have to be Hindu first, then you can be Indian and then you have to be whatever sect you
[Guest]: are and all of that. So we had said, we are women first. What do you do with us? We don't
[Guest]: really care which country we belong to. We are Indians and so theek hai, we are Indians,
[Guest]: but we are women. Wherever we live in the world, we are going to be treated a certain
[Guest]: way. What do you make of us? So he said, bahot se jail hain and all of that in a very dramatic
[Guest]: way. He was a very good looking guy. So Ravi Dvivedi, his name was, he died later in a
[Guest]: pretty tragic accident sometime later. I heard about that. Bhopal ka ladka tha, lekin bahot
[Guest]: good looking tha aur bahot bade ada se kaha usne yeh baat. We, of course, totally freaked
[Guest]: out and also because we could see our own women friends who were Maharashtrian girls
[Guest]: and they were supporting this guy. So they were in that mess with him. So then we rushed
[Guest]: to the ISA public meeting and got really, we threw ourselves night and day into the
[Guest]: ISA campaign because we wanted them to win and we wanted these guys to get to lose, ABVP
[Guest]: to lose and all of that. So after that also, but after the elections also, I wanted to
[Guest]: again retreat. I didn't want to be involved. But again, it was a feminist thing. ISA and
[Guest]: SFI won the election. So ISA won the president's post that year and SFI won other posts. In
[Guest]: 2003, ISA had won all the top three posts and the last post was went to SFI. So it remained
[Guest]: with the left. But there was also a lot of quarreling on the left. So a lot of arguments
[Guest]: on the left. But we did have some very good friends in the SFI also who were basically,
[Guest]: again, the feminists were our friends. So there were feminists in the SFI some who were
[Guest]: good friends. And it was again, a feminist outrage that led me to get active in ISA finally,
[Guest]: the last barrier basically. So the last barrier was that, you know, there was an ISA conference
[Guest]: happening to select leadership. And there's factions and stuff about, you know, so I didn't
[Guest]: know any of this. And I decided my woman friend who was the leader there, she had decided,
[Guest]: she nominated all our names, you know, three or four of us. So we had all prepared to say
[Guest]: no, no, no, we don't want to be in the leadership and all. Leave us, leave our names out. In
[Guest]: the meantime, there was this hapless guy who stood up, and he spoke. And he said, jab ek
[Guest]: hai humare paas mein, ek Tithi Bhattacharya hai, one woman we have, no, in the leadership.
[Guest]: So why do we need four or five more? And then my shyest friend, the one who'd never spoken
[Guest]: in public, okay, she went huffing and puffing to the stage and suddenly burst out into an
[Guest]: angry speech, okay, saying that, what is it? Are we all, you know, just body parts over
[Guest]: there? Irreplaceable one by the other, we are all separate people. You have so many
[Guest]: men, nobody's saying you have one man, why do you need more? What is this and all? And
[Guest]: all of us then went and gave speeches and all and immediately went into the methrutval
[Guest]: leadership. And my friend was so happy, the one who was already, the two friends we had
[Guest]: who were already in the, you know, leadership there, they felt like that guy had done their
[Guest]: job, okay. They were very, very grateful to him. They were like, oh, so they said we couldn't,
[Guest]: he couldn't have done better had we paid him, you know. And then of course, the last barrier
[Guest]: was when I contested elections. Again, I didn't want to contest. I was very reluctant to contest.
[Guest]: But then, yeah, I was kind of persuaded by Chandrashekhar ki laddo chupchap and all of
[Guest]: that. So then I contested and won to my shock and surprise. So yeah, after that, I didn't
[Guest]: hesitate anymore. I took on a lot of responsibilities after that.
[Amit Varma]: And Chandrashekhar, you're referring to Chandrashekhar Prasad, who was killed tragically, right?
[Amit Varma]: The way you've told the story, it can totally be a web series, you know, pivotal scene guy
[Amit Varma]: goes and says these things, shy girl gets up. So tell me something earlier, you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about how you were also, I mean, you didn't use the term shy, but you were kind of happy
[Amit Varma]: spending time with yourself, not a very outgoing, gregarious person, as such. But then when
[Amit Varma]: you get into politics, when you get into activism, you're making speeches, you kind of have to
[Amit Varma]: come out of yourself. What was that sort of process like that learning to do all of those
[Amit Varma]: things? Tell me about that.
[Guest]: That was the biggest challenge for me. And that continues to be a challenge, I'd say.
[Guest]: Because I was and am, you know, basically a very private person who, you know, it's
[Guest]: the kind of person, if the world was an ideal place, then I would just like to be teaching
[Guest]: and reading and writing and living on a mountainside with a dog or something like that, you know,
[Guest]: dog and cat. So that's me. That's my ideal life. And I sometimes, you know, daydream
[Guest]: and think, kash, you know, kisi din revolution ke baad, but I know ki revolution ho bhi jaye
[Guest]: toh revolution ke baad kaam badh jayega, ghatega nahi. So anyway, the thing is that I used
[Guest]: to resist, you know, so I know that when I contested elections, suddenly I, you know,
[Guest]: I was giving all my time to campaigning, right? So the day the elections ended and we won,
[Guest]: so Chandrashekhar and I had won, the other two people on our panel didn't win. So he
[Guest]: won president, I was joint secretary. So the same evening, he came to my hostel, called
[Guest]: me down and said, chalo chalna hai. Maine kaha ho gaya na, elections. Now kaha chalna
[Guest]: hai? So he's like, what do you think? People have voted for you. Come with me. We have
[Guest]: to go say thanks to people and all of that. So I went reluctantly. And on the way, you
[Guest]: know, and I realized how he's meeting people, people are chatting, people are talking and
[Guest]: he's just, people are telling him all kinds of things about their family members, this,
[Guest]: that. So at the end of it, I was like, when will I get time to study if I'm going to be
[Guest]: doing this? So he gave me one look and tried to talk to me and persuade me ki nahi, you
[Guest]: know, and I realized that my worst nightmares have come true. My time is no longer my own
[Guest]: and I was really panicking. But I think that that basically started it, that gradually,
[Guest]: you know, and he played a very big part in that. He and my partner also, who was also,
[Guest]: who still, I mean, he doesn't really, he is in a sense, he's private in the sense he doesn't
[Guest]: like social media. He doesn't want his name out anywhere. He, you know, mostly it's all
[Guest]: behind the scenes work. But he was not someone who considered his time and his space to be
[Guest]: his own. So he had, you know, his room would always be open. So Chandu's also and my partner's
[Guest]: also. So these were people who lived their lives very much in the public, you know, and
[Guest]: so they, you know, seeing them and figuring out that there seems to be a reason for this.
[Guest]: It's not just because you want people's votes, you know, it's actually because this is a
[Guest]: job, just listening to people, just someone coming and telling them how worried they are
[Guest]: about their mother who's sick back in a village. Just someone who's coming and telling them
[Guest]: about their love life and, you know, how they are suffering because they think they're feeling
[Guest]: rejected or something. All kinds of things they would come in. So not all of them are
[Guest]: things which you're going to go and deal with as a neta, you know. But the point is that
[Guest]: being a neta meant that you are actually available to people for a lot of things. And that, you
[Guest]: know, gradually I did adjust to it, but I still find it a challenge. So I still need
[Guest]: to and I accept it about myself. I'm like, OK, I am like that. So I need to recharge
[Guest]: sometimes. I need to switch off sometimes. I do need to take off and have some private
[Guest]: time myself. So I do that sometimes when it's possible to do it, you know. And then I feel
[Guest]: like, OK, now, you know, I feel restored and I can again be at beck and call of anybody
[Guest]: and everybody all times of day and night.
[Amit Varma]: So now, you know, most of us in our journeys, the things we do are instrumental. So if I'm
[Amit Varma]: studying this, it's because I want to become this. Or if I'm, you know, doing this work
[Amit Varma]: experience is because I want to do that next. This is what it will do for my career, so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. But it seems to me that with a certain kind of people, you know, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's an artist or whether it's a politician or whether it's a whatever, at some point,
[Amit Varma]: that becomes a calling, you know, in the way that you mentioned Chandrasekhar and your
[Amit Varma]: partner, that at some point the doors are open and people can come in and talk and that
[Amit Varma]: becomes a calling and that becomes your life. So, you know, and from what it seems to me,
[Amit Varma]: the day after you win the election, you're not there yet, because you're like, hey, how
[Amit Varma]: will I study? Why do I have to go now? But then you become that, right? So what is that
[Amit Varma]: shift like? What is the transition like? Is there a moment where you step back and say,
[Amit Varma]: okay, this is me, this is me for the rest of my life. This is what I do. Is there something
[Amit Varma]: like that?
[Guest]: There wasn't a moment. I think it happened over some time. And I didn't really, it wasn't
[Guest]: a moment at all. So I think it was a negotiation throughout and it took time. So I know that
[Guest]: in April of 94, was it? No, April of 95, it must have been. Yeah. So that time, you know,
[Guest]: you had your end semester exams coming and assignments to write and so much work, you
[Guest]: know, you didn't type in those days. So my hands and my handwriting is very bad. So it
[Guest]: was really difficult to, you know, write and took me time and all of that. So at that time,
[Guest]: you know, that was time when you only studied. But at that time, you know, there was supposed
[Guest]: to be an important sort of meeting in the university, which was supposed to take decisions
[Guest]: about fee hikes and stuff. So the idea was that there was to be a march to the HRD ministry
[Guest]: also to say, no, don't hike college fees and university fees and all. And I was like, okay,
[Guest]: thoda kaam kar denge, parcha-parcha aayega toh hum bandh denge, type ka. But basically
[Guest]: I realized that no, it can't happen like that. We all have to take responsibility. Otherwise
[Guest]: the burden falls only on two, three people. How are they supposed to spare the time? So
[Guest]: gradually after a lot of arguments, this, you know, I came to realize this. Again, you
[Guest]: know, my partner is a very, very big part in realizing that because he, and he made
[Guest]: a whole lot of us realize it, you know, that this is something serious, that this is not
[Guest]: just a hobby. It doesn't matter if you're going to teach later. If you may have a job,
[Guest]: you may do other things. He has a job now. But the point is that if these things that
[Guest]: you're doing, these things are not optional, they're not less important than others. They're
[Guest]: not a hobby. They are things that need to be done. So you find a way to do them. So
[Guest]: I realized that yes, if I pushed myself, I did finish all my assignments. Well, I got
[Guest]: good grades and I also managed to do all the work that was necessary to make those protest
[Guest]: events a success, you know, you know, so that was a, that happened. And then came the time
[Guest]: when Chandu's death was a turning point in a way I didn't realize. I had still thought
[Guest]: I'd be teaching and all of that after that. And that was the year I was submitting my
[Guest]: MPhil dissertation. So I had again, you know, I'd taken off and I told all my comrades that
[Guest]: look, I'm studying and unless it's an absolute emergency, do not call me. I'm on the third
[Guest]: floor in my hostel and writing. So there was no mobile phones, right? So there was a call
[Guest]: in the, there was a phone in the guards room. So you people got calls there. So someone
[Guest]: called there. So a phone call. So I was wondering now, who can it be? And why are they calling
[Guest]: me? They all know that this one month, one and a half months I need to write my dissertation.
[Guest]: I can't spare. So anyway, I went down grumbling, took the call and it was someone from my party
[Guest]: office in Delhi. And they said, Chandu ki hathya ho gayi. I didn't recognize the voice
[Guest]: because it wasn't someone I knew well. So I immediately said, you're lying. Who is this?
[Guest]: So then he gave the phone to someone whom I knew very well. And I could make out his
[Guest]: crying and he said, yes, it's true. Just now. It was literally minutes after it had happened.
[Guest]: Minutes after four o'clock. So then I just freaked out. And then I had to go and tell
[Guest]: a lot of people and all of that. And then we had this whole movement. So my writing,
[Guest]: my MPhil became quite difficult, you know, because literally everyone was on the streets.
[Guest]: So when I finally got back to writing, I think I didn't do a very good job. And my guide
[Guest]: was very upset with me. And among other things, she said, you know, what is this? You know,
[Guest]: where were you and how could you not write? And you have to, you have to make a choice.
[Guest]: You know, you can't do both and all of that. So I remember thinking, feeling very angry
[Guest]: at that in a sense, because I felt like she should have understood that it wasn't physically
[Guest]: possible for me to not be out on the streets in those weeks and think that I can actually
[Guest]: how could I, you know, how could I possibly, you know, one of our closest friends has been
[Guest]: killed in this manner. So I, with the help of other friends who helped edit, my guide
[Guest]: was right in the sense that she was right about one thing. She read what I had written
[Guest]: in terms of my chapters. And she said, it reads like an MCD, whatever, drain inspectors
[Guest]: report. Okay, it was very boringly written, very badly written. So then I had a friend
[Guest]: who helped edit it. And she was wonderful in the time she gave me editing it and making
[Guest]: it actually read like something. So without that I could never have got through. But because
[Guest]: of all that extra editing work I did, I missed out on going to Cuba, something which I will
[Guest]: always regret. Two people had gotten a chance to go from our organization to Cuba for a
[Guest]: youth conference. And I was one of them. And I couldn't go because of my MPhil. I really,
[Guest]: really regretted that because yeah, it was sad. But after that, that was a turning point.
[Guest]: Somehow after that, I found myself, I did apply, went for a couple of interviews for
[Guest]: jobs, didn't get them and wasn't really interested. But I was hesitant in the sense I wasn't sure
[Guest]: my party needed me. I thought of myself at that time as a party member rather than just
[Guest]: ISA, not a student. So then I went and spoke to one of our party leaders. He didn't push
[Guest]: me. He said, I said, do you think I should take up a job? He said, if you want a job,
[Guest]: you should take it up. You can always do party work with it. I took that to mean, oh, maybe
[Guest]: they don't really have anything worth that I can do. Then there were others who spoke
[Guest]: to me and said, tumhe jaruat hai kya abhi? Paise ki jaruat hai kya hai? What's the problem?
[Guest]: I said, no, I'm OK, actually, and I don't have to take up a job right now. So they said,
[Guest]: in that case, please, there's lots of work for you to do. So then, of course, the jobs
[Guest]: they were giving me again, every job that I've been given, I've been scared of initially.
[Guest]: I've wanted to say no to. So they wanted to give me the ISA president's job and I wanted
[Guest]: to say no. But then I went to the meeting saying I'm going to say no. But then I went
[Guest]: there and I said yes, eventually, because I realized, oh, it's the call of duty, basically.
[Guest]: So I said yes. And then, yeah, I learned of the job and found I could do it.
[Amit Varma]: So by party, you mean CPIML, right? CPIML. Yeah. So what does politics really mean after
[Amit Varma]: this? Because none of the communist parties, from what I remember, and you'll have to forgive
[Amit Varma]: me if my knowledge of this is very rudimentary, but from what I remember, none of the communist
[Amit Varma]: parties were really winning too many seats, certainly not in the north of India. So what
[Amit Varma]: did politics really mean in that sense? Was it activism? Because again, it's not instrumental
[Amit Varma]: in terms of there's practically no chance for your coming to power. So are you trying
[Amit Varma]: to maybe shape the culture in little ways, making small impacts on the margins? What's
[Amit Varma]: the end goal?
[Guest]: No, not really. I don't. I see the job as all of it, including the elections and all
[Guest]: of that. I see electoral wins also as important and necessary, as well as all kinds of other
[Guest]: changes which are equally important and necessary. But it's more in terms of I don't see the
[Guest]: win as a win for a particular brand name or a win for particular persons. I think that
[Guest]: every win which is hard won, very difficult to win, but those wins for a left party are
[Guest]: basically wins for a certain class of people who otherwise are always losing. In my party's
[Guest]: case, for instance, I remember that when Chandu did give me a party membership, offer me a
[Guest]: party membership, he took me on a long walk around JNU campus and he appealed to my feminism.
[Guest]: And he said, what do you think? Wouldn't you want to know more about how women wage these
[Guest]: struggles in terms of, for instance, laboring women, Dalit women in Bihar who faced a massacre
[Guest]: by the Ranbir Sena. So they faced a massacre because they are in a certain struggle and
[Guest]: it's not an armed struggle. So what do they do in that struggle? What are the forms? Aren't
[Guest]: you interested in learning from them? Because otherwise you will only have this much experience
[Guest]: and that's it. So I noticed that he wasn't telling me, you have a lot to give those women.
[Guest]: He was telling me the opposite, that you are limiting yourself because you are not taking
[Guest]: what they could give you. And so you should actually, you should be knowing a lot more.
[Guest]: You don't know enough. So I realized that that was what I wanted to do. And I was doing
[Guest]: that and their victories. So every election that they won, our party won an MP seat in
[Guest]: 1989 and then MLA seats, they first won in the, in 1992, 1996, I think. Yes, 96. So that's
[Guest]: when the Ranbir Sena massacre started happening and there was this whole pushback and then
[Guest]: the Lalu phenomenon was also there. So our party's meteoric rise was suddenly halted
[Guest]: because the social justice space was then divided between the Janata Dal and our party.
[Guest]: So till then, the social justice space was mainly our party. But as the 90s, with the
[Guest]: rise of Lalu, that became divided. There was a divide. But I wanted that these forces,
[Guest]: these people who are fighting these battles for land and wages and dignity, their winning
[Guest]: an election means it's their victory. Their victory. I wanted that. So basically, I was
[Guest]: doing it for that. So it was, and I still am. So it doesn't matter so much. I mean,
[Guest]: I want us to win more seats. I want us to do much better. I'm thrilled when we do. But
[Guest]: I am not terribly crushed when we don't. Let's put it that way. It doesn't crush me when
[Guest]: we don't because I realized that, well, that's where the movement is at now. That class of
[Guest]: people is not anywhere close to winning right now what to do, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three follow up questions about your political journey. And one of them is
[Amit Varma]: that when you join a party, and I think you mentioned earlier in 94, when you were sort
[Amit Varma]: of being voted by different parties, and people said, hey, join IFA and you were like, no,
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to, you know, I want to maintain my autonomy and think for myself and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. And it strikes me that joining a party also carries a risk of pleasing allegiance
[Amit Varma]: to a tribe, you know, in different subtle ways that you may not even realize yourself
[Amit Varma]: that you become circumscribed by that. And that's especially so if it is a political
[Amit Varma]: tribe in the sense that the fundamental thing about politics is you need to win. There is
[Amit Varma]: that will to power, that will to power involves thinking in certain ways that you might not
[Amit Varma]: otherwise do not just thinking in terms of principles and ideas, but thinking in terms
[Amit Varma]: of vote banks positioning, like you said earlier that, you know, we never looked at our win
[Amit Varma]: as a victory for a brand name or a person. But nevertheless, if you're in politics, and
[Amit Varma]: you want to win and you want to follow the will to power to his logical conclusion, those
[Amit Varma]: are sort of things that you are thinking of. So what was this something that you know,
[Amit Varma]: was an issue like one thing that I often say, and I think is by and large, true across the
[Amit Varma]: world and across politics is that politics corrodes character, because you might go in
[Amit Varma]: there with certain principles. But then politics is the art of compromise. And it is the art
[Amit Varma]: of finding a way to win. And then gradually you just, you know, you do things you may
[Amit Varma]: think are necessary compromises, you don't really believe in them, but you change along
[Amit Varma]: the way. So is that a journey that you were conscious of that you managed to avoid? Is
[Amit Varma]: that a tussle that is always there? Or is your party different? Or, you know, what's
[Guest]: your sort of? I love the question, Amit, because it was
[Guest]: certainly in my mind, that was certainly a reason why I was hesitant. And I have a complete
[Guest]: abhorrence of cults. So I won't even use the word tribe, okay, because tribe I can still
[Guest]: see as different. I have a complete abhorrence of cults. And on the left, you have no dearth
[Guest]: of cults. Okay, there are plenty. And I was not, you know, I cannot see myself as being
[Guest]: a member of a cult ever. So I was worried about that. But two things that sort of made
[Guest]: me understand things a little better. One was that I felt that the idea that I am this
[Guest]: individual person, and standing alone on something, apart from everyone else makes my position
[Guest]: more independent or more superior to others wasn't something true. It's not always because
[Guest]: I realized that, you know, what are you changing, then at the end of the day, change comes when
[Guest]: you are interacting with others. And it is always something that's collective. Somebody
[Guest]: I admire, an artist recently wrote, I saw a social media post of theirs, won't name
[Guest]: them. But I saw a social media post of theirs, where they had several posts about how an
[Guest]: individual is the one who makes the chance you get, you know, you get insight and truth
[Guest]: only as an individual, not as a mob, not as a crowd. I thought about that a lot. And I
[Guest]: don't agree, because I think that truth is not something people get it. It's not just
[Guest]: something that's given to you as an insight. It's not just a light bulb moment, always.
[Guest]: It's often something that you realize you want, but it is possible to get it only by
[Guest]: working with a whole lot of other people. And if there are people, there are going to
[Guest]: be differences of opinion. So the issue is whether you're able to have a democratic way
[Guest]: of functioning and decision making. And in ISA, very early on, I was very reassured by
[Guest]: the fact that this was not a place where everyone agreed with everyone else, very far from it.
[Guest]: Okay, so there would be these heated arguments without getting our personal relationships
[Guest]: altered. Okay, so we were very close and loving and caring for each other, while being absolutely
[Guest]: so I know that my feminism was something that a lot of men in my organization resisted for
[Guest]: a bit in the sense that they said, no, no, you are very critical of Marxism, but you
[Guest]: haven't read Marxism, right. And I realized that some of what they were saying was true.
[Guest]: Because when we got arguing, I realized that the Marx which I had read was the Marx I had
[Guest]: gotten from postmodernist critiques of Marxism. So then they would poke at me and I would
[Guest]: go back and read, you know, what I had thought I had read before, and realize that, oh, it's
[Guest]: actually saying something a little different. So I would also change my mind, but I realized
[Guest]: that they do change their mind on many things. And those came out of these arguments. And
[Guest]: the best thing was that even where their minds were not changed, I would write leaflets for
[Guest]: the organization, and they would be signed by everyone, including those who had not agreed.
[Guest]: So I realized that that was, you know, I felt very reassured in that, that a feminist thinking
[Guest]: I wrote something called a feminized Marxism. And a lot of the Marxist, pakka Marxwadis
[Guest]: looked quite horrified and asked several of our ISA national leaders, ki yeh kya paagal
[Guest]: ho gaye ho kya? What is all this feminized Marxism? What does it mean? So they said,
[Guest]: no, actually, she's written it and we are carrying it in our name and read it. It's
[Guest]: not, you know, it's not so bad. Don't go beyond the title, read what she's written. So now
[Guest]: when I read that title, I cringe a little bit, because it's not exactly the way I'd
[Guest]: put it now. But yeah, I mean, I do realize that there was a germ of what I hold even
[Guest]: now. And that happened over a time, over a journey. And collective decision making is
[Guest]: still in my party. Even now, there's no, there's no, you know, cultishness at all, you know,
[Guest]: so it's not like koi bada neta hai toh uski baat bas maan lena hai and all of that, not
[Guest]: at all. But I do realize that it's a bit different, that there are, there is a chance of this
[Guest]: happening in left parties. It has happened internationally. Okay, there was a cult around
[Guest]: Stalin. There was, there have been cults around other leaders. And there have been cults in
[Guest]: other ML groups. I see a very cultish behavior in some left supporters online, especially
[Guest]: for instance, when they're defending their, you know, the CPM position in West Bengal
[Guest]: right now. So it's this blind defense of the indefensible. You know, you are facing a reality,
[Guest]: but you're saying, you know, the sun is shining, but you are saying no, it's midnight. And
[Guest]: I believe it's midnight and you people are all liberal idiots who don't understand that
[Guest]: it's midnight, you know, or when it comes to China, you know, so if I, if my party criticizes
[Guest]: what China is doing with the Uyghurs, there are plenty of cultish fellows you meet who
[Guest]: are, who will say, oh, this is, you know, CPM is a liberal, Kavita Krishnan toh liberal
[Guest]: hai. Toh liberal hona bahut kharab cheez nahi hai na. The communist is supposed to be, the
[Guest]: problem with liberalism is that they don't realize that those liberal values are not
[Guest]: accessed by everybody. Not everyone can have the benefit of what liberal, the good that
[Guest]: liberalism offers. That is the problem with liberalism. The problem with liberalism is
[Guest]: not because it's liberal. The problem is because you don't realize how to make it available
[Guest]: to everyone. And that can, so the communists have to be liberal for everybody. No, that's
[Guest]: the whole point. The point is not that you become authoritarian for everyone instead,
[Guest]: right? And so I am, I'm still very, very wary of cults, but I think that somehow in CPIML's
[Guest]: own experience and the way it has developed as a party, that's for another conversation
[Guest]: sometime. But I think that in its own experience of growing, it too has had to consciously
[Guest]: avoid becoming a cult. So I remember just one small example of that. I know that, you
[Guest]: know, my, the magazine I edit, which is the party organ is called Liberation. So my party
[Guest]: is called CPIML Liberation. So initially it used to be called the Vinod Mishra group,
[Guest]: because there were groups named after this person, that person, this person, that person.
[Guest]: Vinod Mishra, he became the general secretary suddenly because several other people who
[Guest]: were leaders died. They were killed by the police or they were killed in custody, police
[Guest]: custody. So he found himself in the late twenties, a young man, suddenly the general secretary
[Guest]: of a party, which was facing huge violence, facing a lot of depression, and that was scattered
[Guest]: all around. And he turned that around. And I don't think of it as just being his remarkable
[Guest]: abilities. At that time, I doubt whether anybody thought a 27, 28 year old had any remarkable
[Guest]: abilities. It was just that it was his job. He had to do it, but he did turn it around
[Guest]: and he did it by keeping a very straight head. And the first thing he did was to say, no,
[Guest]: this stops. It's not Vinod Mishra group. It has to be a party. And the party means it's
[Guest]: a collective. The collective means it's collective decision-making. What I say doesn't go. If
[Guest]: I don't persuade you, it doesn't go. So he then managed to persuade a party that was
[Guest]: underground to actually start contesting elections, start doing things differently, start realizing
[Guest]: that class struggle takes many forms. Caste and gender became pretty central to the struggles
[Guest]: that were launched in the 1980s by our party. All of that. And it happened also because
[Guest]: there was this very conscious, this thing that, so there are jokes about ML parties,
[Guest]: okay, which I'm the, you know, several jokes about ML parties and how cultish they can
[Guest]: be. Okay. So my own comrades used to tell us those jokes in which they would be about,
[Guest]: you know, how to address Charu Majumdar. So should he be addressed as comrade? So the
[Guest]: point is that our party developed by laughing at this, by joking about this and saying,
[Guest]: please, no, this is not what we want to be doing. Okay. By very far from it. So, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it just strikes me that if Sri Sri Ravi Shankar joined your party, you could call
[Amit Varma]: him comrade, comrade Ravi Shankar. But so I'd actually told you, I had, I'd actually
[Amit Varma]: told you, I had three questions about your political journey. And I've asked one of them.
[Amit Varma]: So you would imagine there are two left, but one more popped up from, you know, what you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned about how within ISI, you would have all these heated arguments, but you'd
[Amit Varma]: still love each other and be friends and all of that. And the arguments were just at an
[Amit Varma]: intellectual level. And we don't see that in the modern discourse so much. And my theory
[Amit Varma]: for why that is, is that what social media especially does is that one, it enables people
[Amit Varma]: to form these sort of echo chambers, find a tribe or the cult as it were. And then the
[Amit Varma]: incentive there is always to raise the status within that echo chamber. And the only way
[Amit Varma]: of doing that is by moving to the extremes, and by getting increasingly shrill. So sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you can, you know, attack people in other echo chambers and never actually talk to them
[Amit Varma]: or address their arguments, but just attack them. And sometimes it becomes this quest
[Amit Varma]: for purity within your little cult, where you attack someone from the same cult for
[Amit Varma]: not being pure enough. So it seems to me that therefore, our politics in a sense, is necessarily
[Amit Varma]: going to be driven to extremes in this manner. And, you know, I don't know if I am if this
[Amit Varma]: is just the availability heuristic that because, you know, I'm on Twitter so much, because
[Amit Varma]: I noticed this stuff, I'm noticing it. And maybe it was always like this. But my sense
[Amit Varma]: is that the discourse has become degraded, where everyone is living in their alternate
[Amit Varma]: realities. And we don't talk to each other anymore. What's what's your sense?
[Guest]: What you say about social media? Absolutely. And I'll speak a little bit about that immediately
[Guest]: after but I just wanted to correct one thing that our arguments in ISA were not just intellectual.
[Guest]: I think we felt them very, very personally. So, you know, when they say personal is political,
[Guest]: it's also that the political is very, very personal to us who are, you know, living politics.
[Guest]: And I don't think it's only for activists. I think for a lot of people, if politics is
[Guest]: at all about your values, then it is something deeply personal. It is something deeply personal.
[Guest]: I felt this, you know, when I was reading Anja Lumba's, who was my guide, by the way,
[Guest]: my MPhil. So Anja Lumba's very, very fine book called Revolutionary Desires. So she's
[Guest]: written this book about the women in the first phase of the Indian communist movement. And,
[Guest]: you know, that's one of the things which I felt while on reading that book. But these
[Guest]: are women for whom it's not just that their personal is political, it's that the political
[Guest]: is so deeply personal to them. So they can feel, you know, emotional ups and downs like
[Guest]: you do in a love relationship. It's like that. So our arguments were deeply felt and
[Guest]: they were personal and we had quarrels, we had arguments. I only say that it didn't mean
[Guest]: that we wrote off people because of those arguments. Because in general, we cared for
[Guest]: each other. We knew each other very well. And so we knew each other's quirks also. We
[Guest]: knew each other's, you know, blind spots also. And so we were a very diverse set of people
[Guest]: who were still very loving to each other in that sense. And I can't say more than I think
[Guest]: I think most of all for that, I mean, I'm not saying it just because he's dead. But
[Guest]: Chandu was really remarkable in that way. Because he was someone I realized whose politics
[Guest]: came from a place of love, not from a place of intellect alone. I think for me, it was
[Guest]: most of more of an intellectual sense and of ideas and duty and all of that. But for
[Guest]: him, he really loved people. And then he wanted to make their lives better, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And he was that kind of person who would have these very, very loving relationships with
[Guest]: people who were in rival organizations, people who were very critical of us. He'd argue bitterly
[Guest]: with them. But at the end of it, they knew that if they needed help, or if they were,
[Guest]: you know, they needed succor at some point, they knew they would find it with him. And
[Guest]: that was something which really stayed with me for a long time. But what you're saying
[Guest]: now about social media, I think the first problem which I see with social media, apart
[Guest]: from the, as you say, the tendency to be more one dimensional, more, you know, you also
[Guest]: get a I'm talking even about myself, that on if I'm on social media, and I see somebody
[Guest]: has an argument, right? My whole body, okay, from my toes to my head, wants that dopamine
[Guest]: hit of smashing it back with an answer, okay? I wouldn't be able to do that if I didn't
[Guest]: have this at my fingertips. And I realized over time that I didn't like that feeling.
[Guest]: I didn't like doing that anymore, because I realized that it is making me also react
[Guest]: in ways which is unnecessary, even if it's an unfair attack. I'm not talking about trolls,
[Guest]: I'm talking about maybe, you know, someone I know on social media, but they don't agree
[Guest]: with me. I don't have to smash it out of the court, I don't have to smash it back in their
[Guest]: faces. I can wait a little bit, think about it. And then, so I tell myself that it's like
[Guest]: drunk driving. So I tell myself, don't drive while drunk. So don't tweet while angry. Okay.
[Guest]: So I tell myself that if I'm in a particularly angry or volatile mood, maybe I shouldn't.
[Guest]: It took me a very long time to come to this place, I can tell you, because I've done a
[Guest]: lot of ill-advised tweeting and posting. And it is my comrades, in fact, who have persuaded
[Guest]: me, who have gradually gotten me to see that this is not a particularly wise or good thing
[Guest]: to be doing. But I think for me, the worst part of social media is that what it does
[Guest]: is it teaches young people that you can become a, you know, you get recognition very fast
[Guest]: on social media, by doing very little outside social media. Or if you're doing something
[Guest]: outside social media, so showing it on social media becomes the main thing. And so the tendency
[Guest]: is that you start thinking of yourself more as an individual. And I'm not saying this
[Guest]: badly about the persons, I'm talking about the structure of the, you know, social media
[Guest]: itself and media. And then media picks you up from there. It happened to me. But the
[Guest]: point is, you know, since 2013 movement, before 2013 also, I was doing the same thing and
[Guest]: had been doing it for more than a decade. Okay. But media didn't know who I was, they
[Guest]: had no clue I existed. I gave a speech to about 25-30 people outside Shreela Dixit's
[Guest]: house. And 25-30 because by that time, you know, water cannon chal chuka tha and a lot
[Guest]: of people had been chased away. So I gave that speech and left. Okay. And that speech
[Guest]: went viral. And so suddenly people realized that, oh, here's this articulate person and
[Guest]: start calling me to every media channel. So initially, I had no discrimination, I just
[Guest]: got yanked around and go everywhere. Then gradually, I started realizing cutting it
[Guest]: down. But I and that recognition that came for me as an individual, I realized that I
[Guest]: would have to fight to make them take my organization's name. And they would think that this is a
[Guest]: business for political prachar. And I would tell them, no, the point is, I'm only representing.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I would just be a talking head. No, I'm representing the wisdom, collective
[Guest]: wisdom that an entire organization of lakhs of people is living every day. No. So how
[Guest]: is it fair for just for me to just go as Kavita Krishnan Samajik Karekarta? Don't do that.
[Guest]: You know, I'm going there because my organization does this work. Okay, so then I have to force
[Guest]: them to do this. My mother used to watch me on TV and text me when she realized when when
[Guest]: she'd tell me they aren't giving IPAS name. So when there would be a break in between,
[Guest]: I'd call people and say, why isn't you know, because I couldn't see what they're showing.
[Guest]: So that took a long while. But the point is that happened to me when I was in my 40s.
[Guest]: Okay, I was it when it happens to people who are in their early 20s. I think they find
[Guest]: it much harder to think collectively. So then it changes the dynamics within groups, it
[Guest]: changes the dynamics of how you then they start thinking, okay, I'm this political figure.
[Guest]: I have this politics. Where can I take this in my bag with me? I started out in this left
[Guest]: organization. But if the left organization doesn't have much career opportunity, where
[Guest]: will I win? So maybe I can just take all this progressive politics and go with it to Congress
[Guest]: or to X, Y, Z. And I think they're, I'm not saying this in a bad way about any of the
[Guest]: people who've done this. I understand how it's happening, but I feel bad about it. And
[Guest]: I think that they have often had a very disillusioning experience after that, because they've realized
[Guest]: they can't do that. You can't, you know, your left ideology and left politics comes with
[Guest]: a certain kind of practice. You can't just pin it on your this thing like a badge and
[Guest]: go carry it with you somewhere else, you know, you won't be able to do the same kind of politics.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just kind of think aloud. And it strikes me that the fundamental difference here is
[Amit Varma]: that for the casual person who's not really into a cause, the cost of posturing has gone
[Amit Varma]: down almost to zero. Like I imagine in 1990, let's say you care about cause X, or let's
[Amit Varma]: say in 1990, you don't care about any cause, but you'd like to posture that, oh, I am on
[Amit Varma]: this side, you can tell it to people in your drawing room at a party, and it has no impact.
[Amit Varma]: But if you actually want to, you know, build that brand of yourself, you have to go to
[Amit Varma]: rallies, you have to put in the hard yards, you have to do all of that. And whereas on
[Amit Varma]: social media, the cost of posturing is for all practical purposes, zero, anybody can
[Amit Varma]: just say anything and, you know, appropriate that label or tag for themselves and oh, look,
[Amit Varma]: I'm so compassionate, I care about X or Y or Z, or I'm so sanskari, or I'm so nationalistic.
[Amit Varma]: I think I mean, this applies to all the cults, of course. And then what happens is that the
[Amit Varma]: genuine carers in a sense, and again, I'm thinking aloud, get sort of drowned out by
[Amit Varma]: all the shallow posturers who are then competing with each other. And therefore, Twitter gets
[Amit Varma]: or social media gets further and further away from the real world where people are actually
[Amit Varma]: doing real things, but maybe shat on on Twitter for not being pure enough or whatever, any
[Amit Varma]: kind of random thing.
[Guest]: I very much agree with you. My only caveat to that would be that then it's not social
[Guest]: media versus real life. It's more about movements that are there in real life, and are also
[Guest]: on social media. So for me, something like Yloitor, or something like Pinjatod, which
[Guest]: is even more so Pinjatod, to me, those are in a different category, you know, because
[Guest]: they are not just about individuals who are, you know, saying something. It's not just
[Guest]: a statement on social media. It's not just a discourse. They're actually trying to organize
[Guest]: and social media is one of the organizing tools of it. Not the only one, but one of
[Guest]: them. I think that as far as that's concerned, that's good. But my worry is that it's also
[Guest]: the other way around. And I keep seeing that happening because it's also like if it didn't
[Guest]: happen on social media, it didn't happen at all, right? But the point is, there's lots
[Guest]: of movements, lots of interesting political developments that happen off social media,
[Guest]: and not all of them can happen on social media. It's not just about social media space. See,
[Guest]: it can be a remote andolan in a village, and you can find a way to get it on social media.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about gender politics. I can tell you that much
[Guest]: of the work which I do as a feminist activist, or which my organization does, cannot be ever
[Guest]: shared on social media or on media, ever. Okay? I cannot do that. The reason is because
[Guest]: so much of it is in the realm of private talking to survivors and victims of violence. I'll
[Guest]: give you an example, and I'll tell you how insidious this is. Okay? So there's this comrade
[Guest]: in our office here who is one of the most senior members of our party, and a very, very,
[Guest]: again, somebody who wouldn't describe himself. He wouldn't use the word feminist to describe
[Guest]: himself, but who is one of those whom I can generally count on to be the most supportive
[Guest]: with, you know, any move that is feminist in spirit. Okay? And that is progressive in
[Guest]: spirit and all of that. He's a very wonderful person. The thing is that newspapers one day
[Guest]: were full of stories about a JNU student, a woman, who was raped by a Delhi University
[Guest]: some student. Okay? So the papers were full of this rape. And, you know, the papers obviously
[Guest]: did not report on any complaint being filed, any protest, any this, any that. Okay? So
[Guest]: it so happened that a couple of days after this, the papers had been full of it, and
[Guest]: I happened to visit our office. And this comrade, he sat me down, and no, he didn't sit me down.
[Guest]: I realized that he'd been speaking to a whole lot of other people and had been telling
[Guest]: them in the office, I think that ISA, you know, it's really become very problematic
[Guest]: because look, they are not taking up this issue. And why are they not taking it up?
[Guest]: It's because, you know, they must be thinking that, oh, this happened in a room. So somewhere,
[Guest]: you know, there was a conservative bone that had gotten activated in him. So he thought
[Guest]: that because we are sort of these feminists who think in terms of free interaction between
[Guest]: the sexes, he thought that maybe that's why they think, okay, because this happened in
[Guest]: a hostel room, they don't want to believe the girl or something like that. And how wrong
[Guest]: is that? And all of that. So he filled his head with all of this and told several others.
[Guest]: So those others told me. So I, of course, marched into him and I sat him down and I
[Guest]: said, pehla toh yeh dar why didn't you ask me first? Okay? I wasn't a student then, but
[Guest]: I'm a women's organization activist. You could have asked me, I'm in Delhi, or you could
[Guest]: have asked some of the students. So I said, now I'll tell you what's been happening. So
[Guest]: I told him that, look, the same night that it, the same evening it happened, a night
[Guest]: people got to know. So I saw activists, one of whom is a, has had training in psychiatry,
[Guest]: has had training in counseling. She and some others, they went to meet this survivor. They
[Guest]: spent hours with her just sitting quietly until she was, or sitting around until she
[Guest]: was in a position to talk to one of them. When she agreed to talk, she told them what
[Guest]: happened, but she said that I'm a foreign student and I do not want a police complaint.
[Guest]: I do not want an MLC done. And I do not want to complain to the university because if my
[Guest]: parents get to know, that's the end of my education, they will pull me out of college.
[Guest]: So a lot of attempts happened to persuade her, telling her that her privacy will be
[Guest]: cared for, but, and to go for an MLC also because she was actually hurting. So they
[Guest]: said, look, you need medical care, you know, so why don't we take you to a professional
[Guest]: who will, both medical and psychiatric care? She said, no, because then they are obliged
[Guest]: by law to report it to the police and I can't have that. So she didn't. And for two days
[Guest]: after that, different people had been to try and talk to her and had not succeeded. And
[Guest]: she didn't agree. Eventually, I think at the very end, I think she filed a complaint,
[Guest]: not of rape, but of sexual harassment. And so that became grounds for the university
[Guest]: to take some action against him. There could never be a police complaint because she was
[Guest]: not willing for it. So I told him, why didn't you have faith? And you should have had the
[Guest]: most faith in those who were most feminist, because it's precisely because they are in
[Guest]: such strong support of consensual relationships that they understand what is non-consent.
[Guest]: So they know to distinct, they're not, you know, you're wrong when they think that because
[Guest]: they think it's okay for people to have sex in hostel rooms, that they think that they
[Guest]: doubt the statement that this girl says, which is that, oh, I was in a hostel room with him,
[Guest]: but he raped me. No, it's the opposite. They're believing her because they understand that
[Guest]: you can have consent, non-consent, and this woman is talking about non-consent. But the
[Guest]: point is that this takes time. And he said, but it didn't come in the newspaper. I said,
[Guest]: it will never come in the newspaper. It can't come. You can't. And not, this is just one
[Guest]: instance. I can, you know, the large, vast number of interventions that we make are of
[Guest]: this nature where you will not be able to talk about it to anybody, you know? So it's hard,
[Guest]: you know? I remember that that person was a speaker of a certain language. So one other
[Guest]: girl contacted me and she had very angry saying, what is ISA doing and how come it's doing nothing?
[Guest]: So I said, you speak that survivor's language. You yourself are a student. You know ISA well.
[Guest]: Why don't you go and speak to her? She spoke to her, you know, very confidently. And after
[Guest]: that, she was absolutely chastised because when she came to me, she had realized that
[Guest]: this is a fragile woman in a fragile state of being. The main job right now on our part
[Guest]: had to be to reassure her that she was not at fault because like every rape victim, she
[Guest]: was saying, why didn't I fight back? Why did I freeze? Why did I freeze when this happened?
[Guest]: Why didn't I hit him? Why didn't I struggle? He then walked me out to the auto. My God,
[Guest]: what was I doing? Why didn't I scream? And, you know, people who were experienced had
[Guest]: to tell her that this is most common. Nobody screams. When someone you know has suddenly
[Guest]: violated you, you are frozen for a very, very long time. So don't blame yourself. And when
[Guest]: she's in that state, you can't be pushing her to, you know, say, why aren't you protesting?
[Guest]: Why aren't you protesting? Why aren't you complaining? Why aren't you going to the police?
[Guest]: Because you can't. You have to be. And that person realized it. You know, the girl. The
[Guest]: point is that experience makes you realize this. You can't realize it if you have an
[Guest]: abstract idea that what feminist activism is, is only about posturing, you know, and
[Guest]: only about what is done in the public eye. It's not. I took a long time to answer that one. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's, that's very illuminating. And, you know, just some messiness of the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And it's good to get a sense of that sometimes. And this also speaks to, you know, something that
[Amit Varma]: you've written about in your wonderful book, Peerless Freedom, where you've spoken about how
[Amit Varma]: so many girls across India, if they're harassed in school or treated badly, they won't complain
[Amit Varma]: to their parents, because their biggest fear is they won't be allowed to go to school again.
[Amit Varma]: So that's just so poignant and fundamental. Now, my last two questions about politics,
[Amit Varma]: and then we'll take a break. And then we can come back and talk about the state of women in India,
[Amit Varma]: which is such a huge subject. So my penultimate question is this that, you know, when you were
[Amit Varma]: talking about, you know, the imperative for winning elections with your party, and you said
[Amit Varma]: that it's not about a brand name winning or a person winning, but it's about a certain class
[Amit Varma]: of people finally coming through and winning. Now, my question there is, and this could apply to
[Amit Varma]: the left parties, it could even apply to all kinds of parties, is that this class of people
[Amit Varma]: whom you're trying to, you know, empower, doesn't vote for you, you know, hasn't voted for you.
[Amit Varma]: So what does one make of that? Like, you know, people keep talking about with good reason,
[Amit Varma]: the Brahmanism of the BJP and the RSS and all of that. But the fact of the matter is, in both 2014
[Amit Varma]: and 2019, in the general elections, you know, more of the Dalit vote went to the BJP than to any
[Amit Varma]: other party. So how does one then in politics, does there come a time when you begin to question
[Amit Varma]: yourself when you say that, okay, I am doing this for X class of people, but they don't seem
[Amit Varma]: interested, they're voting for someone else. So what's going on here?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm glad you asked that, because it's a very, very commonly asked question. And it also
[Guest]: ties in with what you asked earlier, which was about, which I didn't answer that aspect of it,
[Guest]: which is about the fact that politics in reality involves compromises, it involves, you know,
[Guest]: tactical considerations, and not just an abstract, ideal thing, right? Because your ideas have to be
[Guest]: have to become real, they have to be adopted by people. And they have to find space for themselves
[Guest]: in a real political fight. And that is going to involve rubbing against, it's not going to be
[Guest]: cast in stone what you do, right? So for me, somehow, my understanding is that this isn't
[Guest]: really something that has troubled me ever. Because to me, I think, and I think of myself
[Guest]: as a very classical sort of Marxist Leninist in that sense. Because I think, you know, that was
[Guest]: the whole thing with Marx and Lenin, that it was about translating Marxist ideas into a political
[Guest]: movement in a country very removed from where Marx was writing, in a very backward country like
[Guest]: Russia. And it involved all kinds of compromises. And Lenin is writing about each of those and why
[Guest]: those were taken. What he wrote also is not cast in stone, because you can see him changing his
[Guest]: mind, okay? As time changed, not just he, you can see him having ferocious arguments with his
[Guest]: comrades. And then realizing later that some of them were right, or them realizing later, no,
[Guest]: no, actually he was right. And sometimes the timing for an idea was just plain wrong.
[Guest]: Any number of examples. The same thing is what you do, you know, things are not, let me give you
[Guest]: an example. Jaise humaari party mein election contest nahi karna hai, which is Maoists ka. So,
[Guest]: even our party, originally at Naxal Party, didn't contest. Because at that time, it was a very
[Guest]: different time where there were not, you know, there was only one major national party, the
[Guest]: Congress. And there was a tremendous sentiment of people against it. And so it was, in a sense,
[Guest]: a revolutionary time. But there was no revolutionary readiness of that kind. And
[Guest]: so the movements happened, but they were crushed. And after that, you had this rise of so many
[Guest]: regional parties and all of that. And at that time, to go on saying nahi, nahi, nahi hum shuddh
[Guest]: hai aur vote nahi daalenge, we realized, and it took us a good long while to realize it, okay,
[Guest]: my party, that in the early 1980s, when they realized that people in our party, and they were
[Guest]: Dalit leaders, who had joined our party on their own, they had formed the party not because someone
[Guest]: from above told them to, because they felt a need for this party. So they made the party.
[Guest]: And for them, when they listened to people, they realized that the main issue for the Dalit
[Guest]: laborers in Bihar was not ki election boycott karo, it was the opposite. They said humko vote
[Guest]: nahi daalne dete. When we go to cast our vote, they kick us out. So they connected that with
[Guest]: their sense of Dalit dignity and Dalit, you know, so their political rights and social rights were
[Guest]: actually connected with each other. And their economic rights, because they said we are not
[Guest]: paid, all of that. So the movement began to fight for their right to cast the vote. And that was a
[Guest]: very violent confrontation, because even if you go non violently to cast your vote, they would be
[Guest]: violently killed, shot, you know, for having cast their vote, without the landlord's permission and
[Guest]: all of that. So then it meant that you had to have some kind of, you know, you have to make
[Guest]: this a movement, then you had to ensure because the police is not protecting you. So you have to
[Guest]: ensure that people are protected, and they go together to cast their vote. So you literally
[Guest]: have to have a jaloose even to cast a vote, right? All of that. So the point is your tactics had to
[Guest]: change, no? You couldn't stick to one thing saying elections are a pig, you know, Lenin famously said
[Guest]: Parliament is a pigsty. The point is that he also, his party also entered that pigsty. And so do we,
[Guest]: and we know it's a damn pigsty. But the point is that in the sense that pigsty in the sense that
[Guest]: you're likely to get muck on you, okay? Even if you win a small panchayat seat, the number of
[Guest]: opportunities for corruption is all around you. So how do we deal with it? We deal with it by saying,
[Guest]: let the janta, public deal with it. So our only stipulation for our public representatives is that
[Guest]: they and the party should be accountable to people. So they have to be democratic means where
[Guest]: you have to be transparent and accountable to people. So people have every right to dharna
[Guest]: pradarshan against you also. So you have to be accountable to them. And if you're not, then sorry,
[Guest]: you know, you face the consequences. We are not about to, you know. So that is one thing. So it
[Guest]: hasn't bothered me, therefore, that you have to make these compromises and all. I think I'm getting
[Guest]: away from your main question, which you asked this time. What was that? I'm so sorry, I got
[Amit Varma]: carried away by that. Which was that, you know, you're fighting this battle on behalf, you said,
[Guest]: of a certain class of people. Yeah. So I love that question also, because, you know, for me,
[Guest]: the point is that it's like, I'll use the Marxist term, which is actually a very useful thing. It's
[Guest]: not a piece of jargon. So evocative, because it says that people are, you know, you're a worker
[Guest]: in yourself. So you're a worker. Objectively, you're a masdur. Okay, your relationship with
[Guest]: your employer is that of a worker and an employer or capitalist, whatever it is. But the point is,
[Guest]: you're not a worker for yourself, because you're not thinking of yourself as a worker. You're
[Guest]: thinking of yourself as a, you know, different things at different times, you think of yourself
[Guest]: as a father, you think of yourself as a mother, you think of yourself as a member of a certain
[Guest]: caste, you think of yourself as a member of a certain community, you may think of yourself as
[Guest]: Hindu vis-a-vis Muslim, dozen hats you're wearing, right? You know, so you're different people are
[Guest]: calling you out to identify yourself in different ways, right? So the Hindutva groups or the
[Guest]: Shiv Sena would call out to the worker in Mumbai, to say you are identified as a Shiv Sena when it
[Guest]: comes to vote, even if you're with a left trade union. So that is the whole challenge of trying
[Guest]: to create a realization. And that happens only in the course of movements. You can't teach it in a
[Guest]: class, you can't do it abstractly. It is in the course of the movement that a worker may realize
[Guest]: that she and I'm when I say work, I don't mean an economic category alone. I'm saying somebody,
[Guest]: for instance, who is oppressed because she is disabled, oppressed because she is Dalit,
[Guest]: oppressed because she is a lesbian, oppressed, because she is a worker. She can be all those
[Guest]: things. Okay, one of our trade union leaders. And when I when I say this to you, I'm actually
[Guest]: thinking about a specific trade union leader we have who is a Safai Karmi, she is a lesbian woman,
[Guest]: she is a, you know, someone who is, who has faced oppression as a Dalit. Okay, all of these things.
[Guest]: And now she is all of those things when she's fighting, right? The point is that for her to
[Guest]: realize that she is not, there are, you know, the BJP will call out to her saying, identify as a
[Guest]: Hindu, hate the Muslims and vote for us. Or identify just as a subject of the government,
[Guest]: who will get these, these things that the government will give you, if you are loyal,
[Guest]: right? You just be loyal and you take these things. So, the idea that no, I actually need more,
[Guest]: I expect more and I expect a certain dignity. I don't expect it for myself alone. I expect it for
[Guest]: everybody, including those who are not part of my group, my organization, whatever. So,
[Guest]: those people who are fighting, right? Who are fighting those movements. I'm talking about the
[Guest]: victory for that movement. It will not always be on part of the majority. It's often a minority
[Guest]: that is fighting it even within among the oppressed. The point is, it has a potential to
[Guest]: change. So, what side do I want to be? Does my party want to be? What is the point of CPIML
[Guest]: existing? Let me ask it that way. Okay. The point of a party like mine existing at all,
[Guest]: is if it is going to be consistently every time, whatever tactical choices it makes, and it will
[Guest]: be. We never used to align with any bourgeois party. We aligned, Congress to chodhi do. We
[Guest]: did align eventually with some other parties and this time we aligned with the Congress, with RJD,
[Guest]: the same RJD jiske saath 90s bhar we remained separate and we were at loggerheads. Okay.
[Guest]: So, how did these changes happen? No matter what decision, because circumstances changed,
[Guest]: okay? But you're making each decision thinking about is it going to help and advance
[Guest]: this movement that's going on here? These movements, or these, you know, the potential
[Guest]: for transformative change, you know, so every decision you make has to be on the side of that
[Guest]: change. If it is not on the side of that change, if it is on the side of saying, achcha chalo,
[Guest]: hum log bhi SEZ bana lete hain, hum log bhi kisanon ki jameen chheen lete hain, hum log bhi
[Guest]: let's also do what all every other party does. And what's the point of a left party existing?
[Guest]: That I think was what happened in Bengal and it should be a lesson to everyone on the left.
[Guest]: I'm not saying this to score a sectarian point with the CPIM, but I really think that a party
[Guest]: that was loved for its, by the peasantry, okay, with all my differences with it, I have to say
[Guest]: that, I mean, CPM had the loyalty and the love of the peasants of Bengal for decades and that broke
[Guest]: because they became a party that took land away. Now, other parties take land away and may get
[Guest]: votes in spite of that, but not a left party, because they're not with you for that. They don't
[Guest]: expect you to be doing that stuff, you know. So to my mind, it's that, that is the raison d'etre,
[Guest]: that that's what you're going to keep doing. And your movements are primary, but your movement,
[Guest]: I do not see movements as being contrary. I see the political interventions and the elections as
[Guest]: being an extension of the movement. And therefore, and I'm not saying that caste considerations and
[Guest]: all are not there. Of course, they will be because they must be there. Why not? You know,
[Guest]: for instance, all our candidates in the Bihar election this time, it so happened that most of
[Guest]: them were from the Dalit or OBC castes, okay. No women, okay. No women. I'm not happy with that.
[Guest]: But a lot of people asked us, so did you plan that all these must be Dalit and OBC?
[Guest]: And we told them that, look, it happened that way, because we only saw, okay, who is the person who
[Guest]: is leading movements there. And the movements comprise of people from these groups. Naturally,
[Guest]: the leadership is from those groups. And it's very natural. In some place, if there happens to be a
[Guest]: leader who is, and there have been, okay, there have been leaders of struggles of the oppressed,
[Guest]: who happened to not be from those communities. But they have been accepted as part of those
[Guest]: communities because they have literally been willing to die with them. Somebody gave me this
[Guest]: answer once when I was asking them, I was playing devil's advocate. So I'll tell you.
[Guest]: So there was a, in the part of Bihar, there was a very terrible attack quite recently,
[Guest]: some years back, and a sudden attack by some, you know, basically upper caste people,
[Guest]: including a policeman. And among those who were killed were one person from a very, very,
[Guest]: you know, extremely backward caste. So he was also from our party, he was a party leader.
[Guest]: And the other person was also a party leader, but he happened to be from the same caste
[Guest]: as the guys who were doing the attacking. Okay, and he was also hacked to death. In fact,
[Guest]: they hacked him to death first. Okay, so it was, they were clearly, you know, they planned to kill
[Guest]: him. So we were talking, and I was just playing devil's advocate about this. Some time after that,
[Guest]: some meeting, we had met other people. And I was just asking those some other comrades,
[Guest]: so would you accept them as a leader of a movement which you are leading? Because you are also
[Guest]: leaders, but would they be also a leader of your movement? Why would you accept that as a member
[Guest]: of your committee or whatever? So they looked at us and they said,
[Guest]: so why would I consider the opportunist Dalit leader who is with the BJP or the
[Guest]: LJP or whatever as my leader, who is betraying me, betraying my caste and my class to the oppressor,
[Guest]: why would I consider them my leader? I'm considering the guy who's willing to be with me, live in my
[Guest]: house, eat what food I eat, and shed blood with me as my leader. I trust him. So that I thought was
[Guest]: a pretty powerful answer. And yeah, it does happen. But if there is someone like that,
[Guest]: they may also contest an election. It's not like we, that doesn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: So one quick follow up question before we go to the break, just part of this thread with a
[Amit Varma]: wonderful answer. Like, you know, one of the cliches on my show, which has become a cliche,
[Amit Varma]: because I say it so often is that, you know, we all contain multitudes, people contain multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: which of course, comes from Walt Whitman's famous poem. And that's part of the answer you gave that
[Amit Varma]: why don't these people vote for us, because there are many aspects to their personality. And in a
[Amit Varma]: sense, that can give us hope that today, if a particular party is appealing to one particular
[Amit Varma]: aspect of their character or personality or beliefs, that maybe there is a way to find
[Amit Varma]: something else to appeal to maybe the better angels of the nature, so to say. But the question
[Amit Varma]: then that also comes up is that, are you in any way that as a party, when you focus on this one
[Amit Varma]: thing, say, maybe it's their identity as workers in the broad sense that you mean it in, or whatever
[Amit Varma]: the locus of oppression is, does that then become reductionist in some way? Like, is there a danger
[Amit Varma]: that there is one hammer you're taking to every nail? And that these people may not necessarily see
[Amit Varma]: themselves as only that, that I am my identity is X, and therefore I am only oppressed? A lot else
[Amit Varma]: is there. So do you think there is that danger? Does that kind of self doubt ever creep in?
[Guest]: Yeah, I see what you're saying. But and totally, I don't think that that is a danger in the sense
[Guest]: that I think you see that somebody who is part of such a movement wants to be able to live a fuller
[Guest]: life, right? So they would like to go on a holiday, they would like to have fun, they would like to do
[Guest]: things. But the point is that their location makes it such that they are either deprived of the means
[Guest]: to enjoy this, or deprived of even the right to dream of enjoying it or to demand to enjoy it,
[Guest]: right? So they are joining a struggle with the sky being the limit. Okay. So I often say this,
[Guest]: that, you know, I've had that argument in my head once with, I think, an essay I read once by
[Guest]: TM Krishna, where he had written something about the left being, I think, you know, why does the
[Guest]: left think that the working class doesn't deserve to have consumer products? And I felt that he was
[Guest]: wrong to say that, to think that the left thought that. I never got a chance to ask him, in fact,
[Guest]: why he thought that way, why he felt that the left actually has such a constrained vision. Okay,
[Guest]: I don't think so. I remember that, for instance, what struck me when I read about the Russian
[Guest]: Revolution, is that one of the first things that happened there, quite apart from a whole lot of,
[Guest]: you know, collectivization, by everybody got a right to go on a holiday to the beach. Okay,
[Guest]: so entire working class families were getting to enjoy holidays at the beach and enjoy, you know,
[Guest]: a vacation, which otherwise they could never have dreamt of doing. And to my mind, you know,
[Guest]: something like that, which is an act of pleasure. It is not something which is, you know, so it is
[Guest]: not a philosophy of deprivation, you know, your struggle is not something which is valorizing
[Guest]: deprivation, which is valorizing, starving yourself of the good things in life. Rather,
[Guest]: it is saying that, you know, let's be a struggling so that everyone gets the good things in life,
[Guest]: which means that then your identity also, it's not so much about saying, okay, I'm this worker
[Guest]: and must always be that, right? It's like, again, you know, that beautiful thing that Marx writes
[Guest]: about what he says is that after, you know, in a truly revolutionary society, somebody could be a,
[Guest]: you know, a fisherman in the morning and play the violin in the afternoon, and, you know,
[Guest]: be this philosopher in the evening, and, you know, so on and so forth. So the point is that you can
[Guest]: be all those multitudes that you contain, and you can be all of them, you don't have to forswear
[Guest]: one of them to be the other, right. And I keep saying that even now, I say that to myself also,
[Guest]: because sometimes the pressure of work is such that you forget the other people that you are,
[Guest]: right. So I, of course, I'll be saying it on your podcast, and now everyone will realize I,
[Guest]: the truth. I lurk on Insta, I don't post much political stuff there only in the last year,
[Guest]: I've had to because during the lockdown, people started doing Insta lives and all.
[Guest]: But otherwise, I used to lurk on Insta, only to post all the kutta billi nature pictures,
[Guest]: because that is a big part of who I am. I'm an amateur, complete amateur, but I love sort of
[Guest]: wandering around, looking at things growing and figuring out how animals and birds live and this
[Guest]: and that, and enjoying all those things. So the point is, when I travel, I do a lot of this,
[Guest]: you know, picture taking with my phone. What do I do with all of that? It's not part of the
[Guest]: Andolan stuff that I'm going to post on my Facebook or Twitter. So then Insta is the
[Guest]: place where I park that and I'm that person there. So I have a whole lot of Insta friends,
[Guest]: who are basically just cat aunties or cat mothers or who are, you know, wonderful cooks or something
[Guest]: all over the world. So they're not people who, you know, necessarily know much about what I'm
[Guest]: doing in my other lives. Okay. But I'm that person also. And I think of Rosa Luxemburg,
[Guest]: she, I've just gotten a copy of her book, you know, so they published her herbarium.
[Guest]: So she, you know, she was a committed communist leader. She, all her life was like that. But she
[Guest]: also, you know, wherever she went, she was very interested in nature. So she used to collect,
[Guest]: you know, plants and flowers, and try and figure out what the name was, what the genus was,
[Guest]: what the species was. And you realize when you read her writing about this thing, that she's also
[Guest]: writing with such love about this, that this is some, you know, she's not writing, she's not
[Guest]: reducing any of this to explaining it away in some, some sharp Marxist phrase, okay. She's
[Guest]: realizing that in this natural world and in animals, there is so much to understand and
[Guest]: their emotions and understanding, which human beings have not yet fathomed, they don't understand
[Guest]: it. So she's writing about it with such feelings, knowing that, in a way, she's writing about the
[Guest]: unknown. You know, she's writing, and there's almost a sense of a spiritual sort of enjoyment
[Guest]: in that, a spiritual experience in that, let me put it that way. You know, and she maintained it
[Guest]: till her death. I mean, you know, while being all the other revolutionary leaders that she was,
[Guest]: so she wasn't, you know, I have good friends who remind me not to become a stick in the mud, who,
[Guest]: you know, has no time for leisure and pleasure and for being these other people that I am.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the moment this conversation ends, I'm going to go to Instagram and see your cat
[Amit Varma]: pictures and dog pictures and all of that. The secret is out now. I think Instagram will crash
[Amit Varma]: because the moment people listen to this on my episode, there'll be a rush of, I just hope the
[Amit Varma]: trolls don't land up there. Oh, you know, we could talk about politics for another three, four hours,
[Amit Varma]: and I'd actually have a lot to argue with you about. But we'll save that for another day. We'll
[Amit Varma]: take a break now. And when we come back from the break, you know, we'll talk more about the subject
[Amit Varma]: at hand of the state of women in India. On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about
[Amit Varma]: positive sum games. Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art,
[Amit Varma]: I have a win-win proposition for you. Head on over to Indiancolors.com. Indian Colors licenses
[Amit Varma]: images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists in India and adapts them
[Amit Varma]: to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor items. You get to surround yourself
[Amit Varma]: with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices, and artists get royalties for every
[Amit Varma]: product you buy. Win-win game. The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable
[Amit Varma]: dresses for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta,
[Amit Varma]: Manisha Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them you're
[Amit Varma]: thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors. Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indiancolors.com. That's colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen. That's right. Unseen for 15% off at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Kavita Krishnan about a formidable
[Amit Varma]: career in life so far, but also about the state of women in India and her feminism and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: let me begin with this question. You know, I've heard you say about your mother in an interview,
[Amit Varma]: I found that, and you said it at the start of the show as well, that she was, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a feminist by instinct rather than by training, stop quote. So and I presume that's the way for
[Amit Varma]: every feminist that first, it is, of course, the instinct, you feel that this is the right thing
[Amit Varma]: to do, it's the right way to behave, and so on and so forth. And then eventually, you read more,
[Amit Varma]: you learn more. And that training sort of happens in different kinds of ways, whether through,
[Amit Varma]: you know, osmosis, or just reading up on the subject, but once you get interested in it,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about your journey into actually thinking about feminism in that kind
[Amit Varma]: of formal way, and how it evolved, like, would you define it differently today in any way or
[Guest]: nuance than you would have maybe 30 years ago? I think that for me, I mean, the way I came to
[Guest]: feminist reading and feminist literature and so on was, I guess, in my BA in Bombay. So at that
[Guest]: time, of course, I mean, I was, I had access to a lot of feminist writing, and some of it was part
[Guest]: of curriculum. Some of it was just stuff that our teachers would read, and so they would encourage
[Guest]: us to read. And then the same happened continued in JNU also. So you were, you know, you were
[Guest]: exposed to a lot of feminist literary criticism, feminist writing, and all of that. So that,
[Guest]: of course, I got only later in life during while studying. So the only thing is the way I would
[Guest]: define myself would largely be the same as it always was, which is the idea of an instinct,
[Guest]: I mean, a basic, basically the fact that you are striving for truly a society which is truly free
[Guest]: of discrimination, of an oppression, okay, of oppression and of structural inequality.
[Guest]: Okay, but I think that my ideas about how to achieve that, how you're going to get there,
[Guest]: those have probably undergone some change. For instance, had you asked me when I was in school,
[Guest]: okay, before I came to Bombay, I used to think that I was not in support of reservations.
[Guest]: So the idea of caste or gender-based reservations, had you asked me, I would have probably said,
[Guest]: no, you know. But the thing is that that was the time when the Mandal Commission
[Guest]: had just been implemented. So I came to Bombay in 1990. So just in the wake of that,
[Guest]: so there were the anti-Mandal agitations happening and all of that. And I am enormously relieved
[Guest]: that as someone who is born in a privileged caste and had the privilege of not thinking
[Guest]: about caste, right, so I had spent 18 years of my life with a great privilege of not having
[Guest]: had to think about caste, because nobody was oppressing me on the basis of caste. So I could
[Guest]: say, oh, I'm free of caste. But I'm hugely relieved that in Bombay, being in the social science centre,
[Guest]: you know, I studied English literature, but since I happened to sort of fall in with
[Guest]: the social science centre and there was someone called Father Rudy Heredia there, he's still here
[Guest]: in Delhi. But Father Rudy was there, there were others, there were my friends there,
[Guest]: there were other young students or former students who would come. So the talk there that I was
[Guest]: exposed to, the arguments I was exposed to there, very quickly disabused me of these ideas of an
[Guest]: abstract equality. So the point was that they would, you know, it would very quickly come to,
[Guest]: I remember having this talk with Father Rudy, asking him with a great deal of diffidence,
[Guest]: what do you say to people who say that the OBC reservations are wrong, Mandal Commission is wrong,
[Guest]: what would you say? So he very patiently explained it to me and he said, you know, there is inequality,
[Guest]: you know, all around. So there has to be something to correct that inequality. If you're going to,
[Guest]: in the name of equality, if you're going to apply the same thing to everybody,
[Guest]: then you're actually perpetuating inequality, because you're giving everyone the same means,
[Guest]: who are, you know, you're not correcting for inequality. So if you don't correct for that,
[Guest]: if you don't acknowledge that inequality exists, and from there I started thinking about, you know,
[Guest]: the idea that yes, then even when it comes to feminism, surely then you have to realize that
[Guest]: all women also are not constituted the same. Women and men are not the same, that's one thing.
[Guest]: But all women also, you know, there are differences which are not constituted the same.
[Guest]: You know, there are differences which are socially there. So somebody who is a domestic worker,
[Guest]: somebody who is from an oppressed caste, someone who has the privilege of studying
[Guest]: in an urban center in an English medium school, and someone who doesn't have that privilege,
[Guest]: there are enormous, you know, chasms there. So instead of talking only about, you know,
[Guest]: as being a feminism, talking about women as a category, right, as an abstract category,
[Guest]: you would also have to talk about pretty specific other kinds of oppression that are happening,
[Guest]: right? Then in terms of other changes that happened was, very early on, I can say that
[Guest]: I was very much in support of LGBT rights, especially in terms of the L and G parts of
[Guest]: those, which I was more, you know, which I had a reason to think about and directly sort of
[Guest]: experience and interact with much earlier on in my BA days itself, okay. So close friends who had,
[Guest]: you know, come out to me as lesbian, my own thinking about my own self and sexual self,
[Guest]: and, you know, which is certainly such a part of yourself, right? But even thinking about that self
[Guest]: and having, you know, very close relationships that were with women and not so much with men
[Guest]: at that time. So the point is that you were, you know, you're going through a period of thinking
[Guest]: also and of doubt and of recognising that obviously there is this spectrum inside you. At that time,
[Guest]: the word spectrum was not used that much. But when I came across it, I could immediately connect it
[Guest]: with my own sense of self and say that, yes, instead of ticking a box that says heterosexual,
[Guest]: tuck, you know, it's not exactly like that, or you can't just tick heterosexual or bi so easily.
[Guest]: The point is that you are someone who, you may be someone who occupies some places on a spectrum,
[Guest]: and that place shifts depending on who you are and who you're meeting and where you are in your life,
[Guest]: you know, all of that. But for me, the new thing was that I did not know, I knew very little about
[Guest]: transgender experiences at all, okay. I knew very little. So I had experience of meeting
[Guest]: trans persons in Bombay, but I didn't really have enough to understand or to get to know more.
[Guest]: That happened over time. And I would now correct a lot of my articulations. So just to give you
[Guest]: an example, one of the classic things which I, you know, when I'm explaining gender to somebody,
[Guest]: the first thing I would say is that, look, there's biology. So there's, you know, what you're born
[Guest]: with. And there is the socialization aspect of it. So biology is ladka hona, ladki hona. But the idea
[Guest]: that there is a masculine and feminine, this is something that comes with socialization. Simple.
[Guest]: But now all that is complicated, because who you are born, it is not, I can't say that anymore.
[Guest]: I can't go and repeat this anymore, you know, unquestioningly, because clearly my understanding
[Guest]: of that has been completely scrambled by not only the fact that political movements have developed
[Guest]: around transgender identities, but also the fact that the science on this has changed.
[Guest]: You know, the science on this tells you that, sorry, you know, your biological gender is not
[Guest]: something just fixed, you know, by certain body parts. It is not, you know, so your chromosomes
[Guest]: are there and there is a spectrum even there. And the point is that it's not and who you're
[Guest]: expressing yourself, yourself, as in just like your sexual orientation, who you are inside
[Guest]: is eventually something which you experience and only you can tell. And what if you feel that you
[Guest]: are somebody who is a woman, you know, who's trapped in a man's body or the other way around?
[Guest]: You know, who is someone else to tell you that, oh, this is just a statement you're making or
[Guest]: something like that, right? So I still think that my learning on this is still underway.
[Guest]: I still find it difficult to, I still feel very self-conscious if I use words other than women
[Guest]: and men. So if I try to write W-O-M-X-N, I feel self-conscious because it's not something I'm
[Guest]: used to doing. And so I feel a little, oh, but I really, and then I often don't use it. Okay.
[Guest]: So I then go back to using what I'm comfortable with. I'm not saying that's correct. I'm not
[Guest]: saying that's right, but I'm just saying that it's a, I think it's a process where one continuously
[Guest]: thinks about things and, you know, makes oneself uncomfortable and welcomes discomfort. So for me,
[Guest]: feminism in a way is about welcoming discomfort about one's understanding of the world around us
[Guest]: and of recognizing that there's inequality and recognizing that therefore, for equity,
[Guest]: it's not just, samanta nahi chalega. Agar aapko samta chahiye, really, in a real sense, then you have to
[Guest]: recognize ki log saman hai and then you can't have a one size fits all for everybody. And then I
[Guest]: realized that this idea is actually right there, up there in Marx also, because when he talks,
[Guest]: I think in the Gotha program about socialism and what happens after socialism, he actually says
[Guest]: that in socialism, you know, you can have each according to his work and from each according
[Guest]: to his capacity. But ideally, you are working for a society where it's to each according to their need
[Guest]: and from each according to their capacity. So it doesn't matter about how much work you're able to
[Guest]: do. You may be elderly, you may be disabled. So the kind of work you do, it's not about how much
[Guest]: you contribute. It's about what you need. So society owes you what you need and you do according
[Guest]: to your capacity. So, you know, that also, he explains this, Marx explains this at great length
[Guest]: about the fact that when you're going to apply equal things to unequal people, then you're not
[Amit Varma]: going to get equity as a result, you know. Okay, I'm not quite a Marxist, as listeners
[Amit Varma]: would know, but I am definitely a feminist. So I'll come at a long winded question and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: begin with sort of where I got my understanding of feminism from and how that kind of evolved.
[Amit Varma]: And my basic I mean, obviously, you begin with instinct that hey, everyone should be treated
[Amit Varma]: equally and all of that. I think my first fundamental influence on me in learning about
[Amit Varma]: feminism was one that perhaps a lot of people share, which is Mary Wollstonecraft's vindication
[Amit Varma]: of the rights of women. Because before that, I really got into Locke and natural rights and
[Amit Varma]: the right to self ownership, all other rights coming from there, blah, blah, blah, the whole
[Amit Varma]: classical liberalism thing. And Wollstonecraft also read Locke and got her sort of principles
[Amit Varma]: from there, except that she extended it, she said that these rights should be everybody's not just
[Amit Varma]: men, but also women. And in those days, of course, you didn't use neutral pronouns. So, but
[Amit Varma]: Wollstonecraft's a big thing was saying that, yeah, Lockean, but for everyone, women should
[Amit Varma]: be treated equally. And that's, you know, pretty much for the next, say, 170, 180 years, that
[Amit Varma]: that's basically what it was that men and women should be treated equally. Now, a couple of decades
[Amit Varma]: ago, Christina Hoff Summers wrote this book called Who Stole Feminism, where she spoke about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the two sort of schools of thought within feminism, which were coming up and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, equity feminism and gender feminism. And about equity feminism, she is basically this
[Amit Varma]: whole Locke and Wollstonecraft view that, you know, it opposes sex discrimination, other forms
[Amit Varma]: of unfairness to women, and so on and so forth. And it guided the first wave of feminism launched
[Amit Varma]: the second wave, so on. And gender feminism looks at, you know, a more in Steven Pinker's words,
[Amit Varma]: words, and I'm quoting from a blank slate, gender feminism holds that women continue to be enslaved
[Amit Varma]: by a pervasive system of male dominance, the gender system in which bisexual infants are
[Amit Varma]: transformed into male and female gender personalities, the one destined to command
[Amit Varma]: the other to obey, stop quote. And then later, he sort of writes about what this means what
[Amit Varma]: this difference means in practical terms, where he says, quote, equity feminism is a moral doctrine
[Amit Varma]: about equal treatment that makes no commitments regarding open empirical issues in psychology or
[Amit Varma]: biology. Gender feminism is an empirical doctrine committed to three claims about human nature.
[Amit Varma]: The first is that the differences between men and women have nothing to do with biology, but
[Amit Varma]: are socially constructed in in their entirety. The second is that humans possess a single social
[Amit Varma]: motive, and that social life can be understood only in terms of how it is exercised. The third
[Amit Varma]: is that human interactions arise not from the motives of people dealing with each other as
[Amit Varma]: individuals, but from the motives dealing with other groups, in this case, a male gender
[Amit Varma]: dominating the female gender, stop quote. And what we see in modern times with intersectionality and
[Amit Varma]: all that is that it's not just male gender dominating female gender. But within this,
[Amit Varma]: there are groups and subgroups, but the overall narrative is a narrative of oppression and
[Amit Varma]: victimhood. And it could be argued that this, you know, it's important to acknowledge all aspects
[Amit Varma]: of one's identity, it's important to acknowledge all aspects of oppression, but it becomes
[Amit Varma]: reductionist. If you define yourself only by this, it's almost like the language of class warfare
[Amit Varma]: in that happens in all of this. And according to Pinker, this is why a lot of people who would
[Amit Varma]: otherwise agree with all feminist aims in terms of you know, treating people equally and all that
[Amit Varma]: vehemently dispute that they're feminist, like he points to a 1997 study when 70% of women
[Amit Varma]: surveyed in the US said they're not feminist. And even in India, you'll hear that kind of nonsense
[Amit Varma]: from random film stars and all will say that, oh, I'm not a feminist, you know, as a feminist is a
[Amit Varma]: bad word or a dirty word, where I would imagine from the way that I am looking at it as you know,
[Amit Varma]: as an equity feminist as someone who's come from that whole wall stone craft and lock kind of
[Amit Varma]: thinking that every decent human being is by default a feminist otherwise, you know, but
[Amit Varma]: what's your kind of take on this, because we see some of these battles and some of these
[Amit Varma]: fissures play out even here. And I'd argue that in an Indian context, it doesn't really matter,
[Amit Varma]: because things are just so horrendously bad in terms of equal treatment that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that these are battles that you know, one can fight at a later point in time. But what's what's
[Amit Varma]: your sense of this?
[Guest]: So see, my sense on this has actually changed in past seven, eight years or so maybe decade or so,
[Guest]: because I did used to, you know, earlier my answer to people who said that are feminist,
[Guest]: you know, I'm not a feminist would be to say no, you know, recognize that you actually are
[Guest]: because you stand for this value, that value. But I later realized that actually, I take it
[Guest]: far more seriously now when someone says they're not feminist, because I genuinely think that
[Guest]: they're not feminist, because I realized that they're not, you know, even on and this goes,
[Guest]: I mean, across ideologies, okay, so even I find people on the left also may define themselves as
[Guest]: not feminist. Okay, so I realized that they are not feminist. And that's not good.
[Guest]: Because in my book, somebody, again, you know, because I am Marxist in method. And for me,
[Guest]: I wouldn't be a I don't think anybody can be a Marxist in that sense, if they're not feminist,
[Guest]: you know, sorry, they're not okay. So you're not because you are, your anti feminism is such that
[Guest]: you are, you're able to say I'm not a feminist, because you are somehow operating under that same
[Guest]: liberal idea that there is a category of human, and you're standing for all human rights,
[Guest]: and women are part of that human. So you are not recognizing that the whole problem is what
[Guest]: Wollstonecraft was talking about, which is that the category of human is excluding women,
[Guest]: it's treating women differently right now. So you're just saying that, oh, I'm standing for
[Guest]: all human beings is not good enough, because you are not recognizing the many ways. And the ways in
[Guest]: which that discrimination operates is, you know, the both the kinds of categories you described,
[Guest]: right. So the idea is, it's, I don't really see a dichotomy there, because I think that,
[Guest]: you know, the social, the psychological, the, you know, even the definition of, you know,
[Guest]: even your basic biological functions, every sphere of anybody who occupies positions that are not,
[Guest]: you know, heterosexual, male, upper caste, whatever, is something which is, you know,
[Guest]: they are having, they cannot take the selfhood for granted at any point. So the point is that you are
[Guest]: then having to recognize that this world is not all right. And if you don't recognize that, and
[Guest]: if you're not specifically fighting, you know, supporting the fights, and there's going to be
[Guest]: fights, you know, call them class war, call them what war, they're going to be fights, they're
[Guest]: going to be acrimonious battles, okay. You cannot do feminism without disturbing the idea of
[Guest]: a happy family. You're never going to be able to do it, sorry. You know, even I, okay, who come
[Guest]: from such a supportive family and all of that, I cannot say that there has been no friction at all.
[Guest]: Of course there will be, because the whole structure that doesn't mean about, it's not
[Guest]: just about those individuals. The problem is that the family situation is structured such
[Guest]: that your labor is expected. I mean, Marx's daughter went through this,
[Guest]: not because her father was a patriarch towards her, but because he was an old man who was ailing
[Guest]: and she was the youngest daughter. She was extremely active. She was the one who was unmarried.
[Guest]: And she realized that she had to, at some point, choose between being around to help her father
[Guest]: and between, you know, pursuing her life as an activist, because there was no way to, because
[Guest]: your social structures don't offer that kind of support structure to allow women to be free of
[Guest]: this caring, caregiving role. So she went through a lot of distress and I identify with that distress
[Guest]: so much because I don't think there's any woman who doesn't go through that. Okay. So my point is
[Guest]: that I think that, so if you're not a feminist, I take it very seriously. I say, yes, you're not
[Guest]: a feminist because you're not thinking in a feminist way about the social problem. You think
[Guest]: you're for equality, but you're not. You're actually ending up working against everybody's
[Guest]: rights because, so, and I'll give you an example, which is a more of a very bold example. I don't
[Guest]: know if it's the best example, but say, you know, somebody like a liberal person who enjoys a lot
[Guest]: of influence, someone like say, Dhruv Rathee. Okay. So if he says that Black Lives Matter should
[Guest]: call itself All Lives Matter, or that feminism should call itself humanism, it has a branding
[Guest]: problem. You know, the point is that that is wrong, right? He's putting it very boldly,
[Guest]: but my assumption is now, my tendency is that when someone says they're not feminist,
[Guest]: to assume that at best, that's what they mean. And at worst, what they mean is that they're
[Guest]: really okay with the way things are. They really think that they want, what they're saying when
[Guest]: they say, I'm not feminist is to say, I don't want to be this fighting person. I don't want
[Guest]: to be perceived as someone who is negative, someone who is opposing a situation where women
[Guest]: are expected to behave in a particular way. Then you're not feminist, because being feminist and
[Guest]: being part of a feminist movement, you're going to be, you know, challenging expectations,
[Guest]: you're going to be prodding on toes, no matter how decent and persuasive you are, somebody is
[Guest]: going to say about you that you're a shrill fighter, okay, or you're bossy or dominating
[Guest]: or whatever it is, okay, happens all the time. You know, I have learned with years and years
[Guest]: and years to, you know, I've become more and more and more persuasive, more and more and more
[Guest]: patient in my way of responding to questions, which may, you know, seem banal or whatever it
[Guest]: is, I'm very, very patient, largely, okay, largely I am. The point is, I realized that no matter how
[Guest]: patient I am, if you ask someone who is observing, what do you think of this person? What do you
[Guest]: think of Kavita? They're going to say, oh, she's the scary feminist. They're going to say that
[Guest]: because you are challenging something so central to their understanding of the world,
[Guest]: that it is damn scary. So, you know, I don't see any way to sweeten that pill, you know.
[Amit Varma]: No, I do think that many people who say they are feminist or not feminist,
[Amit Varma]: but what you're saying that if they say they're not feminist, I take them at face value is
[Amit Varma]: interesting, because my sort of response was that maybe you're not, but maybe you are, maybe you're
[Amit Varma]: just defining it kind of differently. And I think there's a little bit of a dichotomy, I'll tell you
[Amit Varma]: what the dichotomy is, in the sense that, you know, a lot of people like myself would consider
[Amit Varma]: their feminism to be rooted in individual rights, every individual should be treated with the same
[Amit Varma]: amount of dignity and be given, you know, have the same amount of agency and autonomy and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And it's important to recognize in all of this, of course, that certain groups of people
[Amit Varma]: over time historically have oppressed other groups of people. But when you actually start
[Amit Varma]: thinking at the individual level of how you approach it, I think there's a danger of heading
[Amit Varma]: down a slippery slope if like if you say that I'm an individual and I demand equal treatment,
[Amit Varma]: that's great. If you say that I'm a woman and I demand equal treatment, that's great. But if you
[Amit Varma]: say I'm a woman, men have always oppressed women, therefore men are the enemy. And this can go down
[Amit Varma]: a slippery slope, you know, back in the day, you'll remember that there used to be the saying
[Amit Varma]: that some feminists and I'd call them the scary feminists would say things like all intercourse
[Amit Varma]: is rape. Right. And this is the image that a lot of people have of feminism, this extreme thing
[Amit Varma]: where everybody is your enemy. And and I think the danger with, you know, at the level of
[Amit Varma]: description, at the level of analysis, it makes sense to talk about oppression and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to think in terms of groups and all that. But if we have to come out of it to perpetuate
[Amit Varma]: this sort of group violence, in the way that we think, I think that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these are two different things. And I can see where, you know, the fault lines lie.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, certainly, I would not endorse much of an idea about, you know, groups in that sense.
[Guest]: OK, but I'm talking about, I think, you know, understanding not so much oppression as privilege.
[Guest]: Right. So see, oppression has happened and men, too, are oppressed by patriarchy. OK,
[Guest]: women more so, of course. But yeah, a lot of men. OK, so I think that I truly believe that for a
[Guest]: true liberation of the of human society, you know, a feminist liberation is a central part of that
[Guest]: for everybody. It's not just for women to be free of men. It's about men. It's about men and women
[Guest]: to be free of patriarchy, of everybody, of every gender, every sexual orientation, to be free of
[Guest]: this disgusting patriarchy that has actually stifled us, that has, you know, that binds us,
[Guest]: that chokes off our potential and forces us to act in ways which are so horrible to other people
[Guest]: also. Right. So there's that. But also, I'd say that, let me put it this way, instead of gender,
[Guest]: if you talk about caste for one second, OK, because reservation is, again, something which,
[Guest]: and I think caste and gender overlap there. So the idea that the minute you think as an individual,
[Guest]: you can, you know, you may say, yes, every individual deserves equal opportunity and equal
[Guest]: access. But the minute you talk about reservations, an upper caste person may feel, they do often
[Guest]: feel, that I, as an individual, am being discriminated against by that individual who
[Guest]: is enjoying reservation because he's got less number than me and he's getting in and I'm not.
[Guest]: Right. So how do you change the way of looking at that situation? Because if you look at the
[Guest]: situation only in those limits, yes, that's true. Right. You look at it just in this frame. If you
[Guest]: don't look what is happening outside that narrow frame that you've drawn, then yes, here you are,
[Guest]: both of you standing there, you with two marks more, this person with two marks less, that guy
[Guest]: is getting in, you are not. And there's a limited number of seats and you deserve it and somebody
[Guest]: else is getting it. Right. Now, my approach there is that where any inequality is concerned,
[Guest]: if you just broaden the frame a little bit more and you first understand that there are several
[Guest]: problems happening here. One of the problems is that historically and even today in society,
[Guest]: that person is facing a kind of discrimination and reservation cannot address economic disparity.
[Guest]: But it does address or eliminate, to some extent, at the point of admission, it eliminates social
[Guest]: prejudice. So somebody who was going in for an interview, who realizes that they know that your,
[Guest]: maybe your surname, maybe your way of speaking a language, so many things indicate in India,
[Guest]: people can tell your caste from, you know, osmosis, okay, they know that immediately.
[Guest]: You're sending those signals, they get those signals. And then they, you know, there's
[Guest]: prejudice in the mind. And we know this from studies, right? We know this even in studies
[Guest]: in the West, where people have done it for gender, where people have written the exact
[Guest]: same word for word application, one in a man's name, one in a woman's name and sent it to an
[Guest]: employer and the employers pick the man, right? So we know that this is maybe, it may be unconscious,
[Guest]: but it's operating. How do you address that? Then you need something to say that in order to get
[Guest]: rid of that bias there, that bias is not something the upper caste person is feeling. The bias is
[Guest]: something that Dalit person or the OBC person is feeling. A. B, the other thing is that,
[Guest]: oh, but don't I deserve to get a seat? Don't I deserve? Yes, you do. But the answer to that is
[Guest]: not to say that that person is depriving you of your seat, but to say that why aren't there
[Guest]: enough seats for everybody? You know, if so many people want to be doctors or engineers,
[Guest]: why on earth would you have only so many seats? Why can't you, can't this country do with more
[Guest]: doctors? Look at it now. It's not like you have enough doctors in this country. You need far more
[Guest]: doctors. What's your problem? You know, you create, why can't you prioritize education so that people
[Guest]: get, everybody gets admission. And the notion that reservation results in less quality is complete
[Guest]: nonsense. Two quick answers to that, where gender caste, no matter what you see, the point is that
[Guest]: you find, you know, medical system in Tamil Nadu, for instance, being one of the best in the country
[Guest]: where they have the most reservation. The point is that, that, and the point is the looseness is
[Guest]: at the point of entry. At the point of exit, everybody gives the same exam and passes the
[Guest]: same exam, right? So that, in my sense, even when it comes to feminism, is my approach, which is
[Guest]: that if you think only as an individual and only in a very narrow framework, then you're getting
[Guest]: it wrong somewhere. You're getting, you're going to get your answers wrong because you're framing
[Guest]: your questions too narrowly. And in the same regard, I'd say, and we can talk more about that,
[Guest]: but I'll just put in that one sentence here, is that as a feminist, I think that those who think
[Guest]: in terms of individuals alone tend to get, you know, you, you get with an idea of a liberal
[Guest]: feminism, which sometimes gets it very wrong when it comes to understanding larger social
[Guest]: structures and processes. So I have many examples of that, and we can talk about that. But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I, as I said, at the level of analysis, I think we have to look at groups, we have to look
[Amit Varma]: at all these patterns of oppression and all, you know, everything that is structurally wrong. But
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you're moving ahead, I think if you think only in terms of groups, it's a bit of
[Amit Varma]: an issue. You know, I asked you about feminism, you went into caste, it was almost like looking
[Amit Varma]: London talking Tokyo. But I, but I love the fact that, you know, the question that the person
[Amit Varma]: complaining about reservation should ask is why aren't there more seats, which I completely agree
[Guest]: with. Reservations are, in fact, a feminist tool, not just where women are concerned, I actually
[Guest]: think so, because I can see so many women having benefited from caste based reservations, they are
[Guest]: in college and university today, because there's caste based reservation, and they would not be
[Guest]: here otherwise, you know, and that's why, you know, for me, actually, I don't make that distinction
[Guest]: for me in India, especially, caste and gender are absolutely, they're in bed with each other,
[Amit Varma]: they're totally embedded. Yeah, totally. Yeah. Great. So let's move on from here. And I like I
[Amit Varma]: have a bunch of general questions about, you know, broader questions about the state of women in
[Amit Varma]: India. But before we get there, I was sort of struck by the beautiful way in which in your
[Amit Varma]: opening few chapters of fearless freedom, you've kind of laid it all out and summed it all out.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the first sort of fundamental things that you speak about is this mindset,
[Amit Varma]: which creates a dichotomy between safety and freedom. So, you know, which seems really
[Amit Varma]: fundamental, and which is kind of all around us. And tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, Amit, I just wanted to ask you before we go there, my brain is still stuck in your
[Guest]: previous question a little bit, in the sense that one part of it I sort of, you know, when it comes
[Guest]: to, you know, liberal, the idea of the liberal individual based feminism, vis-a-vis these,
[Guest]: so if I just can have, you know, if I can just please, please go ahead. So I just wanted to say
[Guest]: that, for instance, today in the world, there's this whole idea about the lean in feminism,
[Guest]: and, you know, CEOs writing about breaking the glass ceiling and all of that. And the idea of
[Guest]: feminism as being individual achievement, okay, so an individual woman who has broken the glass
[Guest]: ceiling, right. And I'm extremely uneasy with that, because I feel that that's exactly where,
[Guest]: that's where I think my Marxism comes in, okay, because, to me, that is the main, to me, the idea,
[Guest]: you know, of Marxism is not, it's not a Marxism that is not feminist, it has to be feminist.
[Guest]: The point is, it has to be a feminism that actually thinks about feminism for most women,
[Guest]: for all women. And there, if it becomes something which is about individual achievement alone,
[Guest]: what it ends up doing is that it often pits women against each other. And it often means that a
[Guest]: privileged woman is actually gaining her breaking of the glass ceiling at the cost of other women
[Guest]: who are actually, you know, in the very powerful image of a friend of mine who's written a book
[Guest]: called Feminism for the 99%. She says, you know, somebody breaks the glass ceiling up there,
[Guest]: who's cleaning the shards of the ground, okay. Suppose it's some cleaning worker, woman,
[Guest]: presumably from some oppressed race, and so on, who's actually doing that. So where's the
[Guest]: feminism for everybody, you know, so where is the idea that everyone's going to get to play
[Guest]: on that field. And that can't come only by looking at the category as individuals. I agree with you
[Guest]: entirely. That's not just about women versus men. Okay. In fact, I am uncomfortable now,
[Guest]: even with the idea of saying just intersectionality, because intersectionality implies that
[Guest]: there are these different roads, which are intersecting, right. But that's not how reality is,
[Guest]: right. Suppose, you know, if I think of someone, somebody who's a lesbian and a Dalit and a worker
[Guest]: and doing an extremely dangerous and menial job, okay. So, it's not just that caste, gender,
[Guest]: class are all intersecting in her. She is this whole person, no, in which all these things are
[Guest]: expressing themselves integrally as one, right. So you have to find a way to address all of this
[Guest]: together. And so the system also is not patriarchy is not separate from the way in which our society
[Guest]: is economically arranged. It is not separate from caste, it is not separate from, it's all,
[Guest]: it's working together. And it's not, it's not just intersecting. It's all part of one system.
[Guest]: It's not several systems that are intersecting. Let me put it that way. So when I look at it whole,
[Guest]: and I want to find a way of fighting it whole while recognizing that there are all these
[Guest]: different things happening, that's where I find that I find it more useful to think in terms of a,
[Guest]: you know, I find Marxist methods useful there, because they allow me to address a variety of
[Guest]: questions of oppression. While knowing that I want this whole system to change, I don't want
[Guest]: to just tinker with this bit of it or that bit of it. So I don't, I'm not happy enough just saying,
[Guest]: okay, I want this bit to change or that bit to change. So I'm recognizing that, you know, there
[Guest]: may be disagreements about what you want in terms of the systemic change. But surely, you would
[Guest]: agree or anybody who is, you know, invested in an egalitarian society would agree that just someone
[Guest]: woman becoming a CEO or having more women CEOs is not going to ensure that you're going to have
[Guest]: enough women, the large, vast majority of women actually living their lives with dignity. So for
[Guest]: me, the thing to pursue would be, where is the collective childcare? Where is the, you know,
[Guest]: where is better wages for everybody? Instead of privatizing everything? Why can't there be more
[Guest]: access to socialized healthcare, you know, and, and you'll notice that even capitalist societies
[Guest]: now are where the idea of socialism was taboo, are today beginning to talk about that now in America,
[Guest]: it is no longer taboo. You know, you're having up and coming politicians speaking in these terms
[Guest]: now, I think, because, you know, there's no way to really look away from that. So I'm not saying
[Guest]: we repeat mistakes. I'm, as I told you earlier, I'm deeply, deeply suspicious of authoritarianism
[Guest]: and cults. And I think that the left in its historical journey has a lot to answer for,
[Guest]: because if they have become synonymous with authoritarianism and cults, it's not only because
[Guest]: of bourgeois propaganda. It's also because of what has happened in the real Soviet Union,
[Guest]: what's happening now in China. You know, it's very real. Even what has happened in Cuba, where
[Guest]: a lot of very good things managed to survive. But one can't deny that there's, there was also this
[Guest]: whole thing of the sense of a cult and the sense of authoritarianism. Galeano has a beautiful
[Guest]: quotation about Fidel Castro that expresses this, this dichotomy there. But that's another thing.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that acknowledging all of that, that explains why I'm still invested in the idea
[Guest]: of a transformation. My feminism is, my feminist impulse and the work we do, work I do, comes from
[Guest]: that sense of, you know, wanting to work for a collective transformation. Yeah, no matter what,
[Guest]: you know, who knows when we'll see that happen. But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, thank you for that nuance. That's a lot of nuance and a lot for me to think about when I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, replay this episode a few times, hopefully and take notes. And I'm really glad
[Amit Varma]: that this is the point of the show where you actually spoke about against the authoritarian
[Amit Varma]: left because see, none of them is going to listen to this part. They would have reached your cat mom
[Amit Varma]: part and they would have said Arni sunna. So you are kind of safe. They're not going to
[Amit Varma]: lash out on Twitter at this anyway. So kind of moving on. And in fact, even before my freedom
[Amit Varma]: versus safety question, I mean, part of why that begins, your book also seemed to me to be pertinent
[Amit Varma]: to the germination of the book itself. Like it was, you know, in the anti-rape protests of 2012
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, where it kind of germinated, you used that phrase and that very memorable speech
[Amit Varma]: that you gave, which I'll of course link from the show notes and went viral for a reason. Why can't
[Amit Varma]: things like that go viral viral instead of bloody viruses? So tell me, tell me a bit about the
[Amit Varma]: germination of the book and then how you started conceptualizing it because this is all stuff,
[Amit Varma]: you know, okay, India is a deep, deep mess in a million different ways. How do you give it structure
[Guest]: in a book when you start thinking about it? So actually, it didn't start out as me thinking
[Guest]: about a book at all. In fact, the book thing happened only because these couple of young
[Guest]: women from Penguin reached out to me and said, we want you to write. And I said, you know, the only
[Guest]: thing which I've been thinking about systematically for some years now has been exactly this issue.
[Guest]: So well, if I write at all, then I can write about that, you know, that's all. But when it started
[Guest]: was I remember exactly when I started thinking on these lines that I remember very clearly.
[Guest]: The thing is that for some years, I had been a little uneasy with our own movements against
[Guest]: sexual violence, because I felt that we were appealing to a sense of community outrage,
[Guest]: assuming it was there, and finding it very easily, a little too easily. As I said, I'm always on the
[Guest]: lookout for how can I invite discomfort into our zones. For me, feminism and all my activism is
[Guest]: about, and I think the only useful activism is when you're continuously inviting discomfort into
[Guest]: your own zone, you know, rather than just sitting in judgment on someone else far away. So what was
[Guest]: happening was we would have these anti-rape protests and all of that, and they would happen,
[Guest]: everybody is saying, and a lot of it would be saying, fasi do, you know, because that is very
[Guest]: easily it comes to mind. And my own organization used to demand that and all of that. It's deeply
[Guest]: uneasy with all of that. So I would keep arguing that, look, that is not okay, because you're
[Guest]: giving the power to the state. And why the hell should the state have that power? And what are we
[Guest]: talking about to kill someone? And how does it at all help us? Because it's so easy for the ruler
[Guest]: also to say, ha ha ha, fasi do, fasi do, because what does it cost them? Doesn't cost them a damn
[Guest]: thing. Whereas actually the things you need to prevent and prevent sexual violence or other
[Guest]: forms of gender-based violence to give justice and to create spaces where women can be free of
[Guest]: this violence, that stuff, these guys are not doing, governments are not doing. It's all too
[Guest]: easy for them to periodically hang somebody. Doesn't make a difference. That one thing.
[Guest]: The other thing was that, as I said, the slogans, other slogans also, they would all be,
[Guest]: they're all raised in a way which were not creating discomfort to anybody raising them
[Guest]: and to anybody listening to them. And I would keep wondering uneasily, is that community really
[Guest]: with us on this? Are they really with our feminist cause? Because the minute you talk about what is
[Guest]: rape, you would realize that even among the women protesting this particular rape and among people
[Guest]: in the larger society, definitely part of the same village, part of the same juggi, part of the same
[Guest]: community, part of the same colony, the minute you actually talk about rape as it mostly happens,
[Guest]: which is rape not, which is not stranger rape, which involves someone known to you, someone known
[Guest]: to and generally loved, trusted, whatever. Most rapes are like that all over the world.
[Guest]: But the most protests don't happen about rapes like that. As I said, not everything happens
[Guest]: on social media, media and on the streets. So much of those things are not things anybody
[Guest]: really wants to, no one wants to, even the victim won't want to go and do a protest about that
[Guest]: easily. Because it involves a family member, it involves a guru, it involves a teacher,
[Guest]: it involves whatever, not easy. When that comes up, then immediately all the other sexist tropes
[Guest]: come into play. And most of all, what occurred to me is that in Indian society, when you talk,
[Guest]: then the distinction between rape and consensual sexual relationship is,
[Guest]: there isn't a line there at all. Most people use the same word when they, or the same concept,
[Guest]: when they are talking about their daughter who has run away to marry somebody and someone they
[Guest]: don't approve of, and when they are talking about rape. So they think, so the idea of consent is
[Guest]: missing. So the idea of rape as a violation of a woman's consent is missing. And instead you have
[Guest]: the idea of the violation of a woman as sexual property. So she is a virgin, the parents are
[Guest]: supposed to hand her over, hold to some guy of the correct caste. And if she has been raped,
[Guest]: it is the violation of the property of a future husband. And this is embedded in the law,
[Guest]: by the way. This used to be embedded in the law. Okay, so in many ways, I mean, I don't remember
[Guest]: if I can actually recall the details right now. But... Can I read out those sections?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, of course. Yeah, I've written about it in the past. And
[Amit Varma]: just for the sake of my listeners, because I don't think many people realize how our laws have
[Amit Varma]: actually embedded women being the property of men as such. Now, section 497 of the IPC,
[Amit Varma]: which deals with adultery, which was struck down in 2018, which is pretty late. We dealt with it
[Amit Varma]: for 71 years, that said, quote, whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows
[Amit Varma]: or has reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivence of that man,
[Amit Varma]: such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offense of rape is guilty of the offense of
[Amit Varma]: adultery and shall be punished with blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And the point here is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't need the consent of the woman, he needs the consent of that man as if she's property.
[Amit Varma]: And section 498 of the IPC, which is titled enticing or taking away or detaining with
[Amit Varma]: criminal intent, a married woman, you know, thereby implying the possession of some other
[Amit Varma]: man, this one reads, whoever takes or entices away any woman who is or whom he knows or has reason
[Amit Varma]: to believe to be the wife of any other man from that man, or from that person having the care
[Amit Varma]: of her on behalf of that man with intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person,
[Amit Varma]: or conceals or detains with that intent, any such woman shall be punished with imprisonment
[Amit Varma]: of either description or blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And of course, it's it's written almost as
[Amit Varma]: if it is too obscure, which is why you know, if it was written in simple language, I think it would
[Amit Varma]: create a little more outrage, hopefully. So yeah, I'm sorry to interrupt you. But
[Guest]: I'm glad I wanted to remember exactly that adultery law. I couldn't remember the section
[Guest]: and all of that. Yeah, absolutely. Right. Yeah. So that's where I began writing. Now I began
[Guest]: writing about that actually somebody in a website called Sanhati. So they had asked me to write
[Guest]: about sexual violence. So when I wrote about it, I started raising these questions about what
[Guest]: slogan should we raise? What form should the protest take? So that you are actually conveying,
[Guest]: you know, you are promoting an understanding of consent, and promoting an understanding of rape
[Guest]: as a violation of consent, and therefore supporting a woman's consensual relationships also. So you
[Guest]: are not just saying a no is a no, you're also saying a yes is a yes, you know. So women's
[Guest]: respect a woman's yes and respect a woman's no, you know, both. So how are you going to say that?
[Guest]: So I began writing about that. And one essay did was published by them on their website.
[Guest]: So that had happened, I think, around 2011 or 12 only sometime. And in the course of several
[Guest]: struggles in 2012, I began thinking about that and trying to suggest slogans or ways of addressing
[Guest]: things that would actually bring this in. So I was just playing around with it and didn't really
[Guest]: have a clear picture of how to go ahead, but would practically try, you know, that how do
[Guest]: you get people. First, I would try to tell people kindly don't raise the faasi do slogan. So if
[Guest]: others are raising faasi do, it's not that you tell them achha stop it. But it's more about what
[Guest]: other slogans do you offer, which are more useful in talking about consent, right? But I hadn't
[Guest]: really hit upon the best way to do it. And somehow society also wasn't tuned in. What I think is that
[Guest]: in 2012, December, what happened was that suddenly a lot of people tuned in. And suddenly there was
[Guest]: people listening to you actually listening. Okay, so men, women, a lot of people. And so when I
[Guest]: spoke about this then, and I suddenly was able to explain this, I've been struggling with explaining
[Guest]: this for a long while, but in that speech, it came out with a certain clarity. Because just before
[Guest]: the speech, some journalist, young woman journalist had come and asked me that, look, people are
[Guest]: saying, achha theek hai, raat ko na nikle mailaaye. Lekin agar kisi ko job hai, wo nurse hai, raat ko
[Guest]: kaam karte hai, how can she not go out at night if she has a job at night? So something in me got,
[Guest]: you know, sort of possessed with rage at that. Not at that person, not at the young woman there,
[Guest]: but at the idea that why should somebody have to explain to themselves a victim or a potential
[Guest]: victim? Why should she have to explain why she's out in the night? Okay, so then I spoke from that
[Guest]: place saying that, look, in the name of safety, there's some problem with saying suraksha.
[Guest]: Because what people understand by safety is, there's a code there. And the secret code is that
[Guest]: all those codes for safety are for the women. They're not for male behavior, they're for female
[Guest]: behavior. And it will be women who are asked to enforce all of this also. It'll be a hostel
[Guest]: warden, it'll be your mother-in-law, it'll be your mother. It'll be these people who'll have
[Guest]: to do the enforcing much of the time. But the point is that you are, you know, you're not,
[Guest]: do we really want this? We want to be able to have an unconditional access to public spaces
[Guest]: and unconditional safety in living our lives in private spaces also, without having to explain
[Guest]: ourselves for everything. So, you know, we should ask for freedom, not for safety. So that is what
[Guest]: I was going for, that basically the idea of, you know, keep me safe. And so, you know, oh yes,
[Guest]: we'll keep you safe. So let's lock you up to keep you safe. No, you know, don't lock me up to keep
[Guest]: me safe. Please do something that can safeguard my freedom instead. And I realized that because
[Guest]: so many people had tuned in then the first minute, I had no idea. Okay. I was not on Facebook or
[Guest]: maybe I was, I think I was, I'd been dragged there, but I was only like I am on Insta now. Okay. So I
[Guest]: used to learn, yeah, basically it's cats and stuff. So, and I was not on Twitter. I had no clue what
[Guest]: going viral meant. I only thought songs like Kolavari went viral. Viral means, I thought
[Guest]: a song would go viral. And I always used to suspect that someone would promote it and make it viral.
[Guest]: I never imagined that things would go viral. So I got a call suddenly from, and tell me if you
[Amit Varma]: think I'm digressing too much or something, to just bring me back. Please digress, this is very
[Guest]: much tough show for digressions. So I had gone back, you know, this was around the 19th of December,
[Guest]: I think. So I went back to my office where I was working on my Liberation magazine. And the 20th
[Guest]: and 21st, the weekend that was coming up, there was this huge gathering at India Gate. So, you know,
[Guest]: so it was in the 21st and 22nd, I think. So I had a couple of days just before that. So I'm working
[Guest]: on my computer and trying to finish because I wanted to be at India Gate when, you know, people
[Guest]: were gathering. So the phone rang in the office and they connected it to my floor, not my mobile
[Guest]: phone, so phone. So I picked up the landline. It was somebody from America somewhere, some Indian
[Guest]: guy, who said, yeah, actually, we wanted to speak to you. So I said, okay, who is this and all of
[Guest]: that. And so they said, no, we are looking for you because we wanted to speak to you about your
[Guest]: speech that has gone viral. And I said, no, I think you have the wrong person. I have no idea,
[Guest]: you know, who are you looking for exactly? What speech, what viral, no clue. Okay. So he said,
[Guest]: you're Kavita Krishnan, no? So there's a speech of yours and it's got viral. So I'm like, what
[Guest]: speech? And I have no clue. And I was a little impatient also because I was eager to get back
[Guest]: to work. So he said, no, there's a speech, no, which is online on the rape movement. So I said,
[Guest]: oh, I have no idea. Anyway, he wanted to talk to me. I talked to him about the movement and all of
[Guest]: that and put the phone down. Then I wondered what is, so I started asking people in the office,
[Guest]: nobody knew. Okay. Then I realized that I went to Facebook, okay, which I generally didn't access
[Guest]: at all much. And I realized that Facebook inbox, when I went to messages from people I don't know,
[Guest]: I just checked. So I suddenly realized that my Facebook inbox is full of messages, many of them
[Guest]: from young women, most of them from young women who are saying that you gave the speech and we
[Guest]: are so thankful to you for saying this, because we need to be hearing this. It's very affirming
[Guest]: to be listening to the idea of freedom versus safety. And one overriding concern for a lot of
[Guest]: them was that they were worried that the media attention around the rape in Delhi, and Delhi
[Guest]: is being talked about as the capital and whatnot, meant that their parents were reluctant to send
[Guest]: them to study outside whichever small town they lived in or, you know, because they had been
[Guest]: hoping to go study in Delhi, go study in a city and their parents, those who were studying in
[Guest]: Delhi were saying, you know, our hostels are, you know, tightening up on curfews,
[Guest]: our parents want us to go back. Some, you know, some were feeling threatened that their parents
[Guest]: may just say, forget it, don't study there. So there was this whole panic also that was building
[Guest]: up. And they felt that the speech had spoken to them. So I realized that by asking some of them
[Guest]: what speech, that they sent me this YouTube link. So then I realized that it's my friend, Vijay,
[Guest]: who was, who is a, you know, he's into, he's a filmmaker and a photographer. So he had been
[Guest]: documenting, he's been documenting many movements, and generally used to come to whatever protest we
[Guest]: were doing and take photographs, take video and upload here and there and none of us had paid any
[Guest]: attention much. It is there, okay. And I never used to share those links on social media and
[Guest]: all also, because I didn't use social media much anyway. So I called him then. And he said,
[Guest]: but yours is somehow blown up a bit and it seems to be getting a lot of attention.
[Guest]: So even he was not the kind actually to really, you know, worry too much about what was happening
[Guest]: to the videos he was uploading. So he said, yeah, I was meaning to tell you, yeah, there seems to be
[Guest]: a lot of attention that one is getting. So then I told him, yeah, if it is getting attention,
[Guest]: then let's put in at least a bio there that explains to people who they can contact and
[Guest]: who I am in the first place and what the organization's name is and all of that,
[Guest]: so that at least they know it's not just this, you know, video. So then we immediately did that.
[Guest]: And then he started asking, he said, a lot of people are asking for an English translation.
[Guest]: So then a journalist from Tehelka, yeah, actually did that translation. And she did a great job of
[Guest]: the translation. And it appeared in Tehelka the next day. And that translation then we linked to
[Guest]: this video also saying, okay, whoever wants English can access it here. So that I think was my,
[Guest]: you know, my moment of realizing that there is a huge resonance to this idea that people,
[Guest]: that women are not concerned just about not being raped. Of course, they're concerned about
[Guest]: not being raped. But they are concerned also about what the fear of rape or the pretext of
[Guest]: protecting you from rape, how this fear or this conservative pretext basically, you know,
[Guest]: regulates their lives and chokes off experience for them. So both things, one is a genuine fear
[Guest]: that your parents may have for you, of course. But there's also the thing that that fear sort of,
[Guest]: you know, meshes very easily with your parents' fear that you may fall in love and marry the
[Guest]: wrong guy. So both those fears, you know, they're running into each other, which is why if you run
[Guest]: away with someone and marry someone, your parents can go file a complaint of rape and say that he's
[Guest]: abducted you and raped you. And so I began thinking about that more and, you know, talking about it,
[Guest]: writing about it. So in the course of that movement, I think the conversations were amazing.
[Guest]: And that is why I will argue very fervently with anyone who tries to tell me that essentially that
[Guest]: movement was largely a conservative one that was obsessed with the death penalty. Because I think
[Guest]: that there were both strands in it. There was that strand. Oh, yes, there was. But in my experience,
[Guest]: a lot of the sadharan log who had come without any specific agenda, but just thinking that rape
[Guest]: is a bad thing. I had personal experience of stepping into a huge crowd of people yelling
[Guest]: for the death penalty. You couldn't hear yourself speak. OK. And stepping in and trying to raise an
[Guest]: alternative slogan and not able to think of what and then starting the slogan, which, you know,
[Guest]: which says, Mahi laaye maange aazadi. It's a very flexible slogan, right? Because you can fit a lot
[Guest]: of things into it because you can explain what that aazadi is, what kind of aazadi. And of course,
[Guest]: that slogan has two histories. One is, of course, with the Pakistan women's movement started the
[Guest]: slogan of Mahi laaye maange aazadi. And of course, the cadence of the slogan also has to do with the
[Guest]: Kashmiri movement. And a lot of Kashmiri feminists also reminded us of that. And we said that
[Guest]: absolutely, we must talk about Kashmiri women's concerns as well in this movement. So I found
[Guest]: myself with great trepidation, me and another comrade of mine called Sucheta. We would have
[Guest]: this small hand mic. OK, so you couldn't hear yourself speak and you couldn't,
[Guest]: that hand mic also was pretty useless in India Gate because it was so loud and you couldn't hear
[Guest]: yourself think because hamara bhi muh khule toh what would come out of our mouths was faasi doh
[Guest]: because you couldn't hear any other word. OK, so then we said, all right, we are going to try.
[Guest]: So we got into one crowd, one such crowd and started shouting this Mahi laaye maange aazadi
[Guest]: slogan. And it caught on because people were just starved of what to raise also. It hadn't occurred
[Guest]: to them. So then we started saying achha school me bhi, college me bhi, sadak par bhi, ghar me bhi,
[Guest]: is me bhi, us me bhi. And we realized. And then after people had raised the slogan for a while,
[Guest]: then we'd stop. And then I'd start, I'd talk briefly also. So I'd tell them about Soni Sori,
[Guest]: tell them about Kunal Pushpura. And to my absolute amazement, OK, I did this with a
[Guest]: lot of trepidation because I thought if this is some conservative RWA crowd, then they can beat
[Guest]: me up only here for starting to talk about how rapes are done by the army towards women in
[Guest]: Kashmir or something. So I was a little scared if I talk about, you know, Manipur or Nagaland and
[Guest]: Kashmir in this context. But never once did we face any pushback. Never. We did this dozens of
[Guest]: times in that movement. And we never came across an instance where somebody came up saying,
[Guest]: what the hell, you can't do this. In fact, people were listening wide eyed and saying,
[Guest]: really, we haven't heard about this ever in our lives. We didn't know. And this is terrible.
[Guest]: So and two highlights of that, if I may. One was when we were raising the slogan and then
[Guest]: some girls from the crowd started raising a slogan saying, we were saying, khap se bhi aazadi,
[Guest]: and they started saying, bap se bhi aazadi, bhai se bhi aazadi. So it was a real thrill for
[Guest]: Sujata and I because we were literally we had goosebumps, OK, because we were like,
[Guest]: that wasn't something that had occurred to us. But that was precisely what we were saying.
[Guest]: And that was precisely what we wanted, that rape and gender based violence is not just something
[Guest]: that strangers do to you in a bus. It is something that people you love may do to you
[Guest]: because they believe in an idea that of how you are supposed to behave. If you don't conform to
[Guest]: that, they may think that they are entitled to stop you from living your life as you choose to
[Guest]: live it. Right. So this was something which exactly we wanted to do that. And that was happening.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you something, that these efforts are something which even a lot of
[Guest]: people I admire who are otherwise very progressive on many things, usually men
[Guest]: chose not to see what's happening. They chose not to know that feminists were making these efforts.
[Guest]: So I've had a person I admire very much, a human rights activist, and I felt very bad about this
[Guest]: because we attended a program together somewhere and we were at an airport and a call came in from
[Guest]: some journalist who clearly didn't know anything. So she is asking me, OK, I want to
[Guest]: bite from you about how the death penalty is a good thing. So I said, have you even ever heard
[Guest]: me or listened to what I say or what I write? I'm against the death penalty, dammit. So I told her
[Guest]: that first do some homework and then call. I'm not. You can't take a bite from me in favor of
[Guest]: the death penalty. And I knew some people who had done this because they won't even call me
[Guest]: and they just use my name and put, OK, Kavita Krishnan demanded fancy for so-and-so. And then
[Guest]: I have to call up their publication and say, you know, you didn't speak to me. How did you say
[Guest]: that I demanded death penalty? Because I wouldn't, because I don't stand for it. So this person was
[Guest]: standing next to me, this very well-respected human rights activist and all of that. So he asked me,
[Guest]: what was that all about? So I told him and I said, oh, you know, people don't keep track
[Guest]: and they think this movement is, you know, that 2012 movement was all about fancy, fancy.
[Guest]: So he said, but it was, no. And you guys also were with that only, no. And I looked at him with
[Guest]: such a sense of betrayal. And I remember that I wasn't angry enough. I think I was just very
[Guest]: bemused at that point. And you only think of smart things to say later. So I later thought,
[Guest]: you know, that I wanted to tell him and I don't remember whether I finally did or not. Maybe I did
[Guest]: tell him that, you know, how could you? We were spending our time and energy intervening in this
[Guest]: instead of assuming that these are a bunch of, you know, irretrievably right-wing, conservative,
[Guest]: fundamentalist idiots. We went to people and we started finding a way to intervene and talk about
[Guest]: feminist concerns. We did it. You guys didn't. Okay. We did it. And you have the luxury to think
[Guest]: that, oh, you know, you people were all part of that now, that kind of, that movement that wanted
[Guest]: all these, you know, draconian measures. No, we were not, you know. So that was one moment.
[Guest]: The other highlight, which I'll always remember with a great deal of joy,
[Guest]: is that at the Jantar Mantar, there was this one chap who was a permanent fixture at Jantar Mantar,
[Guest]: always raising slogans for the death penalty and looking very large and aggressive. And he was
[Guest]: obviously a sort of Delhi ka local. Toh wo panda, waha saara dim bhi hai. Toh wo panda
[Guest]: waha saara dim rehta tha every day. And he looked pretty daunting. You know, and he wouldn't respond
[Guest]: to anything we were saying. He would go on saying his own thing and raising his own slogans,
[Guest]: almost alone. So one day in February, we had this larger program where we, for the first time,
[Guest]: raised a small dais. Okay. So it was a slightly raised platform. So on that raised platform,
[Guest]: many people spoke and spoke about explaining why the death penalty is wrong also. Even I spoke.
[Guest]: And all of that. So after I spoke, and I'd spoken about many things, when I got down from there,
[Guest]: this man was waiting for me. So I was a little wary because I was like, okay,
[Guest]: maybe he is waiting to confront me with what, how dare you. And he came to me and he said,
[Guest]: Madam, itne dino se aap roz aati rahi hai, maini na aapko pehli baar suna thek se.
[Guest]: Toh isse pehle na, maini suna hi nahi tha aap kya boli thi. Toh aap toh bol rahi thi,
[Guest]: woh toh bilkul achcha laga humko toh. Aap toh sahi bol rahi thi. Toh maini ka,
[Guest]: achcha. Toh he said, bas mujhe do cheezon pe thoda sa doubt hua. Toh one of the things that he had
[Guest]: doubt about was this death penalty thing. So he asked me, he said, lekin aapko nahi lagta ki
[Guest]: jisne itna kharab kiya hai, unko nahi milni chahiye kya? Maini ka, milni toh, saza milni chahiye,
[Guest]: ek toh sabko. Consent violate karne ke liye, hai na? Lekin faasi ki saza de karke,
[Guest]: maini mahilaon ka faida kyun hoga? Rather you will allow the people who are wanting to change
[Guest]: the conversation from women's rights to just feeling happy that somebody has been hanged
[Guest]: and congratulating themselves and going back to treating women in their lives the same bad way.
[Guest]: So he said, haan, yeh toh sahi baat hai. Then, and I also said, look, there are many instances
[Guest]: in which innocent people in all kinds of cases are killed. So death penalty is irretrievable.
[Guest]: You can't change it. You can't bring somebody alive once you've killed them. So what if you've
[Guest]: killed the wrong guy, right? Is the police always reliable? Do they always catch the right guy?
[Guest]: So he's like, haan, that's true. Then the second question he had was, he said,
[Guest]: achha aapne army ke baare mein bola aur wo sab bola. So don't you think that militants also
[Guest]: do violence against women in Kashmir and in Northeast and all or wherever? So I said,
[Guest]: of course. But the point is that the law does not make an exception for them.
[Guest]: If a militant does that, they are considered punishable by law. So our problem is that
[Guest]: nobody should be given an exception for these things just because they are wearing an army
[Guest]: uniform, right? Haan, bilkul theek bola aapne, he said. And I went off feeling a sense of triumph
[Guest]: in a way. And when I told my partner this had happened, he said, woh kya hai na ki woh,
[Guest]: he's been so busy talking that he hasn't, you were at the same level and he didn't hear you
[Guest]: and you didn't have a good enough mic. This time it was on a platform. You had a mic. And in a way,
[Guest]: it was loud enough that he actually stopped continuously talking himself and listened.
[Guest]: And he was like, haan, makes sense. So yeah, I mean, even a very pakka death penalty guy
[Amit Varma]: was actually persuaded the other way. Yeah. Remarkable story. Totally a web series should
[Amit Varma]: be made on your life. Maybe, you know, the narrative in this episode can be the skeletal
[Amit Varma]: structure. You sit down with me and then all the events unfold in vivid flashback.
[Amit Varma]: So before I lead to my next big question, I just want to make one observation of my own,
[Amit Varma]: which you can respond to if you have something to add. And I'll also quote a couple of times
[Amit Varma]: from your book because I want to elaborate on things that you mentioned in your own words.
[Amit Varma]: And then I'll get to my question. One as far as the death penalty is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: the reason I am against it and in fact, against all death penalties in any crime, but for rape,
[Amit Varma]: just the economist point of view is that you're creating an incentive to murder if the punishment
[Amit Varma]: for murder and rape is exactly the same, then in the criminal's mind, it doesn't make a difference
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the risk, but it makes it less likely for him to be caught if he murders a person he's
[Amit Varma]: raping. So why do you want to create that incentive? And the other more deontological
[Amit Varma]: standpoint there is that it is wrong to kill even if the state is doing it. And the point is the
[Amit Varma]: state gets so much wrong. I mean, listeners of the show would realize I don't trust the state
[Amit Varma]: with anything, you know, power always corrupt. So whoever is in control of the state at a
[Amit Varma]: particular point in time, why do you want to give them the right over life and what you what you
[Amit Varma]: said about the army is actually very striking. I had an episode with the philosopher Jason Brennan,
[Amit Varma]: where we kind of discuss the right to self defense and to defend others. And one of the points that
[Amit Varma]: he made, in fact, he wrote a book about it, is that even if somebody in uniform is doing something
[Amit Varma]: right, there is absolutely zero extra protection that that person should have, just because they're
[Amit Varma]: wearing a uniform or they're an officer of the state. So if you see someone beating up a young
[Amit Varma]: girl on the street, it's your moral duty to intervene, even if the person doing the beating
[Amit Varma]: up is a policeman, which is a convincing argument and an interesting episode. Now a couple of
[Amit Varma]: important observations, and I'm only you've already mentioned them, but I just want to
[Amit Varma]: emphasize on them because they made an impression on me. And I think they're, you know, powerful
[Amit Varma]: insights. And I'd like my listeners to realize, and one of them is that you have a chapter on how
[Amit Varma]: in India people treat the home as a haven for the women, women are not supposed to go out and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. But you point out that women are safer on the streets than in their homes. And,
[Amit Varma]: and this is in fact, worldwide, like you talk about a United Nations study that shows that
[Amit Varma]: women who are the victims of homicide globally, about half of them are killed by intimate partners
[Amit Varma]: or family members and only 6% of men in Ireland. In fact, that's 87% of the women who were murdered
[Amit Varma]: in Ireland were killed by a man they knew. And equally, you know, as you've pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: the figures overwhelmingly showed that a lot of, you know, rapes and sexual assaults actually
[Amit Varma]: happen in the home. The other important point to make is about how the way people define rape
[Amit Varma]: in India doesn't often take consent into account, which is bizarre. And this goes in both ways,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out that our notions of consent and non consent are screwed up,
[Amit Varma]: where you've pointed out that how a tremendously large number of rape cases are actually filed by
[Amit Varma]: parents against a man their daughter has eloped with. So they are calling it rape, because their
[Amit Varma]: property has gone away with somebody else. And even and those two people might have consensual
[Amit Varma]: sex or even a kid together, but they call it rape. And on the other hand, because their daughter is
[Amit Varma]: property, they decide who to give it away to. And you have all these arranged marriages where poor
[Amit Varma]: beveled women have to move away to wherever and just begin negotiating life again, and are raped
[Amit Varma]: by their husbands. And that's not considered rape according to the law, which is, again, something
[Amit Varma]: you've eloquently, you know, spoken about and written about in the past. Now, my question here
[Amit Varma]: is this, that we spoke about, you know, how in the law, which is, of course, Victorian era relic,
[Amit Varma]: the IPC, and we know the values they brought in, that women were treated as property of the men,
[Amit Varma]: our culture is very much like that, like I realised that there are different strands in
[Amit Varma]: our culture, we contain multitudes, and there is a liberal strand as well. And in fact,
[Amit Varma]: I'm reminded of this book I discovered while recording an episode in the Gita Press with
[Amit Varma]: Akshay Mukul. And you must have read the book many, many times, because just the title is so
[Amit Varma]: awesome. The title is Marx Vada Ram Rajya by Karpatri Maharaj. Yeah, you're familiar with the
[Amit Varma]: book. And one of the arguments he gives against communism is that because there is no private
[Amit Varma]: property there, men can't own the women. So all women are like, you know, they are in a bucket,
[Guest]: which any man can drink from the image that he used. The Communist Manifesto actually says that,
[Guest]: no, the Communist Manifesto that Marx and Engels wrote has a line to that effect, because they say
[Guest]: that the minute we say that property will be collectively owned, that minute the bourgeois
[Guest]: ideologues start saying, Oh, my God, that means women will be owned in common. And he says,
[Guest]: they don't understand poor things that we don't, we don't look at women as property,
[Guest]: women will not be property, they will be, you know, in charge of their own lives.
[Guest]: The Communist Manifesto has a line exactly to that effect in reply to this kind of nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic. I didn't know that you've kind of completed the story for me. But I found that
[Amit Varma]: line by Karpatri Maharaj, a bucket that anyone can drink from just both hilarious and deeply
[Amit Varma]: disturbing. And I say deeply disturbing, because I think it's reflective of a certain common way
[Amit Varma]: of thinking that is in our culture, which kind of leads me to my question, which is that agreed
[Amit Varma]: that there are multiple strands, but a dominant strand in our culture, certainly today, is this
[Amit Varma]: kind of regressive strand, which says women are the property of men, they should be in the house,
[Amit Varma]: they should take the permission of whoever their male guardian is before leaving the home and blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah, blah, we know all of that, therefore reducing half of Indians to a subspecies.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question then is this, and this is, of course, a strand that's become dominant,
[Amit Varma]: but which was always there. Now, one question that I've asked multiple guests who have come
[Amit Varma]: on the show, especially when we are discussing the Constitution, is that if assuming that the
[Amit Varma]: Constitution was a liberal document, and it's not liberal enough for me, but it's more liberal than
[Amit Varma]: our society. Now, assuming that our Constitution is a liberal document imposed upon an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: society, how can that imposition itself not be illiberal? And this is a dilemma I can't get
[Amit Varma]: around, because you and I would share certain values, for example, the primacy of consent,
[Amit Varma]: and the fact that coercion is bad, and we would share those. But we are elites in a bubble,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, most of the country doesn't share those. Now, Mahatma Gandhi's way would have been
[Amit Varma]: to change the culture, right? Politics is downstream of culture, change the culture first,
[Amit Varma]: and then things will change. And it and that looks like something that we and I'm very broad
[Amit Varma]: tent, including, you know, the liberals and whoever feels this way that we failed in that,
[Amit Varma]: that society hasn't changed, if anything, politics has now caught up with society.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes me feel very bleak, because where is the failure? Was the failure inevitable,
[Amit Varma]: if these beliefs are so deep rooted in society? And, you know, I don't know if I have a question,
[Amit Varma]: but it's kind of a depressing observation. What do you think about this?
[Guest]: You know, I actually attended a seminar once, which was organized by people who were basically
[Guest]: very good scholars about India, Indian politics, Indian society, and specifically the Constitution.
[Guest]: So this was actually it had been organized, I think it was in Norway. And what we said there
[Guest]: has been published as a book, which I, as usual, in my post COVID brain cannot remember the exact
[Guest]: title of it was India at 70 something or the other. But the thing is that there was actually
[Guest]: a session where, you know, I had spoken, and I had spoken in response to, you know, just the
[Guest]: session before that people had discussed exactly this, about whether because they had said that
[Guest]: the Indian Constitution was more something that was sourced from, you know, good practices all
[Guest]: over the world. And so it was, it was experts who were doing the sourcing. And it was very
[Guest]: different from say, you know, the Paris Commune, right, you know, writing, or even the Soviet
[Guest]: Revolution, you know, some some constitution being written there, because those were things
[Guest]: in which people who are writing the Constitution, you know, the doors would keep opening and people
[Guest]: would actually be coming, you can hear the you can read about these descriptions, both for the
[Guest]: Paris Commune and for Soviet Constitution, Bolshevik Revolution, people coming in and saying,
[Guest]: people coming in and saying, you haven't added this, what have you written about us here,
[Guest]: what on earth, you have to change this, you have to change that. So it is a democratic process in
[Guest]: and a much more chaotic process, but a democratic, much more democratic process. So are we imposing
[Guest]: a constitution on, is it more of a pedagogic exercise that you are forcing it on people?
[Guest]: So the way I look at it is, and what I said there also is that I don't think that's quite
[Guest]: the thing. See, in any society, just put India aside for a minute and think about
[Guest]: any society in the world, okay, they still have illiberal tendencies. And quite possibly,
[Guest]: if you put things to a vote, I mean, I would say that even in a country like Ireland, I mean,
[Guest]: getting, you know, the right to abortion, or, you know, other countries in which, you know,
[Guest]: homosexuality being decriminalized and all, they've been able to do it through a referendum.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the fact that they've been able to do this in the 21st century, and not before
[Guest]: this tells you that, you know, that for all this while, the societies were not at that place. And
[Guest]: I doubt if any of the societies were. Even today in the US, I would be suspicious that if you were
[Guest]: to put the right to abortion to a vote, or if you were to put the, you know, the right of gay people
[Guest]: to marry to a vote, I am not sure which position would win. It is not by any means certain, okay.
[Guest]: So the whole point is that democracy is not just about what the majority believes in, right? It's
[Guest]: also about protecting the rights of the individual and the rights of the minority to not be imposed
[Guest]: on by the majority, right? So, and when I say majority minority here, I'm not talking about,
[Guest]: okay, us as a, you know, some educated elites or whatever, right? I'm talking about people,
[Guest]: after all, you know, for instance, if you look at inter-caste marriage, okay?
[Guest]: The fact that there is such a, almost sort of moral panic about inter-caste marriage and
[Guest]: interfaith marriage, and it's growing right now, is because more people are crossing those
[Guest]: boundaries. You know, you're having people putting their lives on the line, marrying,
[Guest]: you know, in the same gotra or across castes or across communities, okay? Which is why every time
[Guest]: you see a louder voice in society railing on, even in history, okay? I was taught this as a
[Guest]: literature student long ago, that if you're reading something in which you're, if somebody's
[Guest]: writing the Manusmriti and trying to lay down the law on this and that, they're having to do that
[Guest]: because clearly people are not doing that on the ground. The reality is, they're not reflecting
[Guest]: reality, they're trying desperately to regulate reality, right? And regulate an unruly population.
[Guest]: So, in India also, I feel that the Manusmriti may have been there and dominant castes and dominant
[Guest]: culture may have lived by those values, even if they did not, you know, exactly read the Manusmriti
[Guest]: every morning. The point is the Manusmriti has encodified a lot of things which were
[Guest]: seen to be the right things and which may have been expressed in a variety of ways in
[Guest]: more popular literature and scriptures and documents. But the point is that clearly,
[Guest]: even in those societies, there were those who were not following those laws. There were those
[Guest]: who were breaking those laws. I find it fascinating to read Wendy Doniger's latest, I think it's her
[Guest]: latest book, which is called Beyond Dharma. She's written repeatedly about, she reads the Arthashastra
[Guest]: and the Kamasutra as being documents that sort of dissenting against the Manusmriti. So, these are,
[Guest]: you know, things that are in conversation with each other and are very subtly dissenting. So,
[Guest]: they are paying lip service to all the rules, but then they are actually preaching something
[Guest]: very different. So, they are saying, so the Kamasutra is saying, but in reality, they are
[Guest]: dealing with a reality in which people are conducting secret affairs, people are having
[Guest]: relationships with people, you know, which are forbidden, extramarital relationships,
[Guest]: relationships across castes and all of that, right? So, my point is that therefore, you know,
[Guest]: the constitution is not an entirely alien document and it wasn't perceived or received
[Guest]: as only an alien document. So, if you look at this book called, again, I'm terrible with the names.
[Amit Varma]: The People's Constitution by Rohit Desai. People's Constitution by Rohit Desai. Yeah. So,
[Guest]: I remember the author's name, but not the. So, that is a fascinating book, isn't it? Because
[Guest]: it is about people, basically ordinary Indian people picking up the constitution and deciding
[Guest]: that they wanted to use it as a shield, use it as their instrument to, you know, claim
[Guest]: inclusion and claim rights, right? So, I don't think of it, therefore, as only, I agree with
[Guest]: you that I think that it's not, you know, liberal enough. It's not, there's a lot more, a lot more
[Guest]: that the document could have been much more. Certainly, in reality, it has not been translated
[Guest]: into reality at all, right? But on the whole, I don't see it as entirely an alien thing, okay?
[Guest]: But to me, what I look at is what you're going to say. There are two ways of looking at this
[Guest]: dichotomy between what the constitution represents as an idea and what is there in reality, right? So,
[Guest]: if I am Ambedkar, if I follow Ambedkar, then Ambedkar said it right then, when it was being
[Guest]: adopted. He said that, sorry, there is, you know, you have one man, one vote, but in society,
[Guest]: it is not one man, one value. You still have a society which is not, which is deeply illiberal,
[Guest]: where democracy is only in the top soil. So, at the end of it, what was he saying?
[Guest]: He was saying, if it's at the top soil, please help it to get more rooted, no? He wasn't saying
[Guest]: that, therefore, this is an alien document that you will have to keep through lack of consent
[Guest]: or whatever, right? He was talking about changing society, therefore, as, you know, he and Gandhi,
[Guest]: what you said about Gandhi, actually, that applies a lot more to Ambedkar, because Ambedkar was,
[Guest]: is exactly saying this, that after all, then you need to be able to change society so that it is
[Guest]: actually one human being, one value. But if I'm Ram Madhav, writing in 2017, when I feel that my
[Guest]: ideology of the RSS, which was, you know, personal non grata in 1947, and certainly after 1948, when
[Guest]: Gandhi was killed, the RSS was a hissing and a byword. But today, the RSS is in power. And he
[Guest]: thinks he's triumphant, he thinks there's going to be a Hindu Rashtra by 2025. So writing in 2017,
[Guest]: Ram Madhav writes about this exact situation, the same gap. He doesn't say constitution,
[Guest]: but he means it. He says that, you know, our rulers, immediately after independence,
[Guest]: all the governments since independence before this one, they were alien to the country,
[Guest]: because they did not operate from the place of what he calls the genius of India. And he defines
[Guest]: this as being caste, community, religion, festival, guru, something like that. Okay.
[Guest]: So, you know, and he says that this is all Western liberal values that they
[Guest]: embraced. And this is the first government that is in tune with the mob. And he deliberately uses
[Guest]: the word mob, because he then taunts those whom he says are westernized liberal intellectuals,
[Guest]: and says that, you know, you are so alienated from family, caste, community, guru and whatnot,
[Guest]: that you are crying now because the mob is happy now. And he is referring to the protests against
[Guest]: mob lynching. Because he's not he's not saying it, but he's using the word mob because he wants to
[Guest]: say, the mob is happy because they're free to lynch and they can, you know, the government will
[Guest]: say damn good job done, good job, rather than saying, oh, you violated the constitution, you
[Guest]: know. So my point is, Ram Madhav is reaching the exact opposite conclusion that Ambedkar is. He's
[Guest]: saying, you have a government that is in line with the mob now. And the ideals that your own society
[Guest]: has values in it, it can be a better version of itself, okay, rather than, you know, looking at
[Guest]: these values as being alien, liberal, westernized values, which is, you know, complete nonsense,
[Guest]: if you look at it that way. Because my point is, you know, for instance, feminism,
[Guest]: they love calling us feminists, you know, westernized, you know, cut off from the world
[Guest]: and everything. But please tell me, I mean, you know, what do you say about and I've written
[Guest]: about this in my book, that what do you say about, you know, some 13th century nun, who is writing
[Guest]: about being free? What do you say about a 19th century housewife, who's writing about yearning
[Guest]: to be free? And they face the same abuses of free sex that we are facing today. I mean, in different
[Guest]: words and different, but the idea was that you are, you are not a good woman. Feminists being
[Guest]: accused of being cut off and your idea of freedom and all has come up only because you are westernized
[Guest]: and so on. And those women who are not educated, who were, you know, the real women of India,
[Guest]: they are not bothered about all this. That's, that's just not true. Because if you look at
[Guest]: centuries ago, long before any idea of, you know, formal feminism or a feminist movement came into
[Guest]: being, the yearning to be free, the yearning to be free of an abusive husband or free of even
[Guest]: domestic chores. As I said, you have the Buddhist nuns writing about this centuries ago, saying that
[Guest]: I want to be free from the chakla belan and whatnot, you know, the home chores and kitchen
[Guest]: and all of that. I want to be free of an abusive husband. You have, you know, a 19th century
[Guest]: Bengali woman from a conservative household teaching herself to write secretly and saying
[Guest]: that I know that people say that if women learn to read and write, then they will become immoral
[Guest]: and so on. And she says Kalyug will come. She writes, I say, blessed, blessed be that Kalyug,
[Guest]: if it means that girls will get to read and write, you know, and she talks about feeling like a caged
[Guest]: bird and wanting to fly free. So what I'm saying is, why assume that a woman in a conservative
[Guest]: household today, who lives a circumscribed life inside the four walls of the home, does not dream
[Guest]: of living a larger life, does not want her daughter to have a different life? Of course they do.
[Guest]: So I think we cannot concede that, and I refuse to concede that, you know, in general, all Indians,
[Guest]: barring a small, educated, liberal elite, basically are, you know, conservative and
[Guest]: share the RSS's values or whatever it is or casteist values or whatever. No,
[Guest]: I think that they have a potential. In fact, I would hazard a guess that at least on some issues,
[Guest]: it is actually a minority that imposes these things on the majority. For instance, meat eating.
[Guest]: Okay. I am a vegetarian by choice because I, you know, I would hope to be vegan and so on and so
[Guest]: forth. That's for a different conversation another day. But my point is that I realize that in India,
[Guest]: diet and so on has so much to do with inequalities also. Okay. And I cannot go around imposing being
[Guest]: vegetarian as a moral value over those who eat meat the other way around. I have to support those
[Guest]: who are being attacked and killed for eating meat. Right. Now, my point is, if you did a poll in
[Guest]: India, I really challenge it. This is one thing on which I am very confident that, you know,
[Guest]: the far right would lose a referendum. If you were to do a poll on meat eating, because most,
[Guest]: you know, the large, vast majority in India is not vegetarian. Okay. It simply is not, you know.
[Guest]: So it's a wrong impression that they are. So on some things, I think it's actually a majority
[Guest]: that is imposing values on the minority because they are much louder, much more powerful and
[Guest]: dominant. But in some other things, suppose you say that, okay, inter-caste marriage,
[Guest]: most people would not want it. Gay rights, most people may not want it. They may feel that this
[Guest]: should be punishable. This should be, they want to. There are, in fact, people who are campaigning for
[Guest]: getting rid of the right to marry, you know, inter-caste and so on. And I think about the
[Guest]: change that has come about. You think about a film like Chameli Ki Shadi. Chameli Ki Shadi was
[Guest]: made, I don't know, sometime in the 70s, probably. Or 80s, is it? I don't know. Sometime, you know.
[Guest]: So it's that lovely film where you have, you know, Amjad Khan at the end being the lawyer.
[Guest]: So there is this girl who has defied her parents and is marrying someone whom it is implied is a
[Guest]: Dalit. Okay. So it is implied that he's from an oppressed caste or whatever. There's an
[Guest]: inter-caste marriage happening, you know. And her parents come up and say, nahi yeh shadi nahi
[Guest]: ho sakti kyunki humari beti hai, humne toh nahi haan diya. So Amjad Khan comes up and says, nahi,
[Guest]: nahi, desh ka samvidhaan hai. Aur desh ka samvidhaan mein likha hua hai ki yeh toh balig
[Guest]: ho gayi hai toh shadi hai. Kahan balig ho gayi hai? Woh toh abhi umar mein kam hai. This is exactly
[Guest]: what happens all of today. And Amjad Khan says, aayiye toh madam. And he calls her school madam
[Guest]: and he says, dekho school certificate mein jo umar likha hai, uske hesaap se yeh 18 saal se
[Guest]: upar hai. So she's an adult. She can marry who the hell she likes. And they're like, what on earth?
[Guest]: We didn't know this was the law. We didn't, you know, they're upset about it. And then he gets them
[Guest]: around. The point is that a film like that could be made then. Could it be made now for a mass
[Guest]: audience? I don't know. You could have it on Netflix, I'm sure. But the point is that today
[Guest]: you're having a complete shift where, ironically, from the 90s onwards, the idea of people marrying
[Guest]: for love, breaking, you know, defying parental, this thing and marrying for love, even if it's a
[Guest]: tragic love, even if it's a Romeo and Juliet story, suddenly with the liberalization coming in,
[Guest]: you simultaneously have a conservative streak where suddenly you have to ask parental permission
[Guest]: for everything. Okay, with hum aapke hai kaun aur dil wale dulhani ale jaayenge. This whole thing
[Guest]: about, you know, reimposing these ideas, you know, these are back in vogue. And now you have an
[Guest]: entire, you know, political movement, which is in power today, which is determined to turn the
[Guest]: clock on all this. And I insist on saying that, no, those youngsters who want to marry intercast
[Guest]: are Indians. They are part of our society. They are not elite. You know, this is happening in
[Guest]: Mofasils. This is happening in small towns. This is happening in villages. This is happening
[Guest]: everywhere. And we are going to stand up for that India because that is an India that wants to come
[Guest]: into being. And that's a far better version of the India that the RSS wants to bring into being or
[Amit Varma]: that we had before the RSS also. That's both eloquent and passionate. And I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: completely. And I have so many asides that I've been writing them down. I hope I don't kind of
[Amit Varma]: forget something. First of all, I wouldn't blame it on liberalization. I'm not sure about that
[Amit Varma]: causation. But we can leave that for another day. Secondly, you know, you had earlier mentioned not
[Amit Varma]: standing for the anthem and you just mentioned being nonveg. So there's an anecdote I'll share
[Amit Varma]: with you and my listeners that about 12 or 13 years ago, I was called as a panelist on Barkha
[Amit Varma]: Dutt's TV show, We The People. And the subject was national symbols, because I had said that I
[Amit Varma]: had blogged that I don't stand for the anthem and that we shouldn't take the flag so seriously and
[Amit Varma]: all that. So they called me as a panelist and Smriti Irani was also there. So this would have
[Amit Varma]: been around 2009. And at one point towards the end, Barkha went around asking all the panelists
[Amit Varma]: that do you believe in sacred cows? And when she came to me and asked do you believe in sacred
[Amit Varma]: cows? I said the only kind of sacred cow I like is a divine steak on my plate. And Smriti smiled
[Amit Varma]: then but she was a little upset after the show about my insult there. The other thing I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to point out is you mentioned free sex. And there is this very badass incident from a while ago,
[Amit Varma]: where you were asked about free sex. Is it okay for women to have free sex and not just you but
[Amit Varma]: also your mother said yes, we have free sex. It means consent. It's a good thing all sex should
[Amit Varma]: be free. So, you know, much credit to you for saying that. That's, that's just wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: What I also want to do is in the course of this, you know, four episodes I've done came to mind.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quickly plug them all for the listeners and have them in the show notes. One is with
[Amit Varma]: Madhav but not Ram Madhav. It's with Madhav Khosla on the pedagogical aspect of the constitution,
[Amit Varma]: exactly what you were talking about. And Madhav has written a fantastic book on and is very
[Amit Varma]: eloquent, though I don't entirely agree with all of his arguments, because I think some of them go
[Amit Varma]: too far in justifying some of the illiberalism of the constitution. But it is what it is fantastic
[Amit Varma]: book. Madhav is a great scholar, again, Madhav Khosla, not Ram Madhav. Another episode I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to recommend is by Tony Joseph, you know, early Indians, where he kind of points out that if you
[Amit Varma]: look at the genetic evidence, you will find that till the year 0 BC or 0 AD or whatever it is that
[Amit Varma]: turning point, India was there was a poverty happening here, as it were, you know, all the
[Amit Varma]: different immigrants from all over were just having a party. And then one particular caste
[Amit Varma]: based ideology from the Gangetic plain somehow gained dominance and endogamy became common,
[Amit Varma]: which is why the Indian subcontinent when you look at it has often been described not as a large
[Amit Varma]: population as the Han Chinese would be, but as a collection of many small populations. That's how
[Amit Varma]: bad the caste endogamy kind of got, which you know, speaks to your point that India wasn't always
[Amit Varma]: like this. We were a poverty culture once. And to underscore that I had an episode with Madhavi
[Amit Varma]: Menon on the history of desire in India, where we speak in detail about the wild and libidinous
[Amit Varma]: time our ancestors had. And just now you spoke about, you know, small towns, India that they
[Amit Varma]: have aspirations, they want to be free. I'd done an episode with Sringda Poonam also on what young
[Amit Varma]: people in small town India want. So all these things are there as far as Ambedkar is concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I agree. It's interesting that you know, this sense of go beyond the topsoil, you know,
[Amit Varma]: change the culture was something that was one thing that Ambedkar and Gandhi could agree on.
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar in 1954, I think did also say that, given the state of what the Constitution had become,
[Amit Varma]: he would like to burn it. And indeed, one of the problems with our Constitution is that as a
[Amit Varma]: cartoonist once quipped, it's not a book, it's a periodical, they keep changing it regularly. And
[Amit Varma]: another episode listeners can go and listen to is the one I did with Tripur Dhaman Singh on the
[Amit Varma]: First Amendment, where it all started where, you know, one thing people don't realize is that yes,
[Amit Varma]: the sedition law was there from British times, but it was ruled unconstitutional by an Indian
[Amit Varma]: court in 1950. And then Nehru brought it back to deal with his political enemies, which just
[Amit Varma]: shows that power does corrupt. And people do contain multitudes, that one can be both liberal
[Amit Varma]: in one way and illiberal in another way. And finally, what you said is that all these laws
[Amit Varma]: actually indicate that you know, these laws came into being when society was progressing. So people
[Amit Varma]: felt the need to bring these laws to kind of control it. And I remember my friend Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalan wrote a controversial piece about this, where she said that, you know, if you look
[Amit Varma]: at the love jihad laws, one way of looking at it is that there are more such marriages happening,
[Amit Varma]: that's why the law was felt necessary. And unfortunately, on social media, that piece
[Amit Varma]: whipped up a storm because everybody interpreted it as saying that she is for the love jihad laws,
[Amit Varma]: which of course she is not, which she wrote in her piece. I did defend her in many places.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember that. And it's an abominable law when she clarified that, take her at face value,
[Guest]: it's in the article, but people just wanted to draw the conclusion. The caption, you know,
[Amit Varma]: very often the captions misleading and people don't read anything about the caption. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: that's the problem. Yeah, people don't read anything. And I mean, I disagreed with the
[Amit Varma]: argument in the sense that I think these people have been trying to do a love jihad law since
[Guest]: the 1920s. Same here, I also disagreed with some of her arguments. But my point is, I said,
[Amit Varma]: she's not saying that the love jihad law is a great thing. I mean, she's not finding an excuse
[Amit Varma]: for it. She's not excusing it. Exactly. And social media mob kind of went after her. Now, finally,
[Amit Varma]: leading on to sort of my next question. And this one came from, you know, you spoke in your first
[Amit Varma]: chapter about this placard that you saw at that at the anti-rape protests of 2012. And this placard
[Amit Varma]: said, quote, we live in a society that teaches women not to get raped instead of teaching men
[Amit Varma]: not to rape, stop quote. And this reminded me of something Jackson Katz once said in a TED Talk,
[Amit Varma]: which is a really important point about the use of language, which I'll quickly read out,
[Amit Varma]: quote, we talked about how many women were raped last year, not about how many men raped women.
[Amit Varma]: We talked about how many girls in a school district where Harris last year, not about how
[Amit Varma]: many boys Harris girls. We talk about how many teenage girls got pregnant in the state of Vermont
[Amit Varma]: last year, rather than how many men and teenage boys got girls pregnant. So you can see how this
[Amit Varma]: use of the passive voice has a political effect. It shifts the focus of men and boys onto girls
[Amit Varma]: and women. Even the term violence against women is problematic. It's a passive construction.
[Amit Varma]: There's no active agent in the sentence. It's a bad thing that happens to women. It's a bad
[Amit Varma]: thing that happens to women. But when you look at the term violence against women, no one is doing
[Amit Varma]: it to them. It just happens. Men aren't even a part of it, stop quote. And my question here is
[Amit Varma]: this that to what extent do you feel that more men are sort of looking inwards or looking at men as
[Amit Varma]: you know, the crux of the problem, a lot of the solutions that people seem to come up with are
[Amit Varma]: either these populist ones like Oh, hang the rapist and all that. Or it is that you know,
[Amit Varma]: it is those, quote unquote, pragmatic arguments that women should not go out late and you know,
[Amit Varma]: what was she wearing and all of that, you know, the onus going on the women and this kind of
[Amit Varma]: brings me to the immediate peg. The reason I reached out to you is I saw your tweet about
[Amit Varma]: the Tarun Tejpal judgment, which is a horrendous, horrendous judgment. And the whole judgment reads
[Amit Varma]: like it was the survivor on trial, and not Tejpal. The onus was, again, suddenly on the woman. So
[Guest]: what are your sort of thoughts on this? Yeah, so first, I mean, I was, there were several,
[Guest]: several thoughts I was having. So I should have also put down my thoughts as you were speaking.
[Guest]: So you may have to remind me a couple of things that you said. But one thing that occurred to me
[Guest]: was before you spoke about the Tejpal judgment, about, you know, this whole thing about focusing
[Guest]: on men, changing men's behavior, right? Changing the behavior of those who are committing violence.
[Guest]: So my thoughts on that, on changing the conduct of not just men, but say, you know, anybody who
[Guest]: behaves in a violent way. So lots of structural violence, you know, recognizing it's happening.
[Guest]: So it's caste violence also, and all of that. How is this change going to happen? And because
[Guest]: we were talking about the constitution and this whole pedagogic, whatever. One thing that really
[Guest]: struck me last year was the Shaheen Baghs. Okay. What I felt was that I had for long been thinking
[Guest]: that, you know, schools, ideally, if I had that kind of a power, then I would want schools to
[Guest]: change the way, you know, for instance, we all have moral science or whatever. So instead of
[Guest]: that, I would say teach constitutional morality. So constitutional morality in the Ambedkar sense,
[Guest]: okay, in the, it's not just what is written in the constitution. It's precisely that concept,
[Guest]: because I don't think anybody has a quarrel with that concept of constitutional morality,
[Guest]: which is that the rights of the individual cannot be subservient to, you can't say that,
[Guest]: all right, you're gay, but because the majority thinks that being gay is a crime,
[Guest]: we'll keep it as a crime. No, you know, because that's the very essence of constitutional
[Guest]: morality is that it cannot be a majoritarian morality, right? So there's a distinction
[Guest]: between what society currently accepts as being moral, and what has to be a constitutional
[Guest]: morality that we all agree to uphold, right? So I may not want to live my life in a certain way,
[Guest]: okay? I may want to arrange marriage and so on and so forth. But I cannot have a right to endorse
[Guest]: violence against somebody who wants to live their life as a single woman or, you know, live in with
[Guest]: somebody or whatever it is, right? So this is what constitutional morality is about. So why can't
[Guest]: schools teach constitutional morality? I used to keep thinking this, but I would often think about
[Guest]: what would it look like in a classroom situation, you know, in the usual kind of school that we have,
[Guest]: okay? And then when I saw the Shaheen bags, I felt like, all right, a class on constitutional
[Guest]: morality should be held in a climate like this. So the idea should be to create a climate,
[Guest]: you know, where there are diverse people who are feeling a sense of freedom to speak and freedom
[Guest]: to argue with each other without being, you know, hit on the head with something telling them to
[Guest]: shut up. And because I saw that happening, and I'm not talking just about what was happening on
[Guest]: stage. So in the Shaheen bags off stage also, I was seeing, you know, parents bringing, Hindu
[Guest]: parents bringing their kids to the Shaheen bags just to spend time there because they felt that
[Guest]: there was hardly any other space where that child would be exposed to a variety of people,
[Guest]: a variety of ideas, and, you know, to a sense of love for the constitution and the flag and the
[Guest]: anthem that was not about standing at attention and, you know, it's not a military drill.
[Guest]: You know, there's a sense of actual love in terms of what am I investing in it? I don't
[Guest]: have to stand up for it or not. My point is, why do I love this? What do I love about it?
[Guest]: And what do I disagree with in it? And how do I see my relationship with these things?
[Guest]: Because I, you know, the country is me first, it's people. So how, what do we want to change
[Guest]: about this country? And, you know, the culture that we love and all of that, because there's
[Guest]: so much that we love here, even those of us who want to change a lot of things. There's so much
[Guest]: that we will carry with us even, you know, wherever in the world we go, because these are
[Guest]: things that are part of us and we love it because it is, you know, in a broad sense,
[Guest]: you know, in a broad sense, Indian or whatever it is, right? So I think that is the kind of thing
[Guest]: which I think of in terms of change. Okay. And the other thing, and even men, I mean,
[Guest]: therefore, you know, exposing boys to, you know, ideas about consent. So in my opinion,
[Guest]: even when people say we want to give safety lessons to women, okay, self-defense, I am all
[Guest]: for self-defense. But I think I don't want to teach women that what Akshay Kumar does, which is
[Guest]: to say, you can, you know, karate chop somebody and so, you know, you should be able to and I'll
[Guest]: teach you how. No, you may be a wonderful karateka, but you may still get raped. You may still be
[Guest]: raped. Somebody can rape you. You cannot prevent rape. You can't. You just can't because rape is
[Guest]: not something which is only going to come as physical force. What if somebody you love and
[Guest]: respect violates your boundaries and you are frozen at that point? That can happen to you,
[Guest]: even if you're as strong as Mary Kom. Okay. So it isn't about, rape is not about that. It is about
[Guest]: understanding consent. It is not about developing muscles or learning karate chops. But for all
[Guest]: means, by all means, teach women, you know, physical, to be physically more confident.
[Guest]: That's fine. But I think as a part of self-defense and a more important part of self-defense is
[Guest]: accepting yourself, you know, which self are you going to defend? So teach women to defend,
[Guest]: to love themselves, to accept themselves, to figure out what is their self as separate from
[Guest]: what their parents want from them or what their boyfriend wants from them or whatever, right?
[Guest]: Because I'm not saying, I mean, boyfriends can be just as oppressive as the parents. Okay. It's
[Guest]: not always that you're, you know, running away with your boyfriend is necessarily going to make
[Guest]: you freer. Okay. So Uma Chakraborty has this wonderful story about a girl whom they helped to,
[Guest]: you know, defy her parents and marry this guy. And then once they were married,
[Guest]: this guy would tell this girl,
[Guest]: and, you know, you have to hear Uma Chakraborty say this actually, you know,
[Guest]: because she says it with such outrage because she said, this is a girl who's gone,
[Guest]: you know, she's had to, you know, leave behind so much and fight so much. You bloody haven't
[Guest]: had to get rid of anything. And now she's with you and you're telling her you can't do this
[Guest]: much only for me that you should now give up bits of your personality and your life.
[Guest]: So of course, I mean, teaching women to respect themselves, teaching girls to respect themselves
[Guest]: and to understand consent in terms of their right to draw boundaries, you know, even then you may
[Guest]: not be protected from violence. But the point is, you at least will feel that if violence happens
[Guest]: to you, you won't be the first to blame yourself. Because there'll be this voice in your head
[Guest]: telling you, no, let me remember what I was taught, which is that I can draw this boundary.
[Guest]: And I know that this is my boundary. But if somebody violates it, they're in the wrong.
[Guest]: I can't be responsible for their violating that boundary. Just because I had a drink with them
[Guest]: and happened to fall asleep, doesn't mean they had a right to assume I was available and to
[Guest]: violate my boundary without my permission. No.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastically inspiring words. I hope many young men and women sort of listen to this.
[Guest]: Yeah. One more thing was which I wanted to say about men was that I wish that more men
[Guest]: would speak to more boys. Because I feel that, well, I've spoken to a lot of young men and with
[Guest]: very good results, I will assure you that I have been surprised on occasions by, if there were time
[Guest]: I would narrate a fantastic story which happened to me on Rajya Sabha TV. But I've written about
[Guest]: it on Facebook. So you can link it if you want. But it was fantastic in the sense in one sentence,
[Guest]: what happened was that it was a debate on marital rape. And the two male panelists marched out in
[Guest]: a rage because they were angry with what I was saying and another women panelist was saying.
[Guest]: And the person running the show, there was an audience. So it had a lot of young men in it.
[Guest]: And they were clapping for those guys. And we thought they were supporting those guys.
[Guest]: When those guys left, the poor woman conducting the show thought, okay, the show is dead.
[Guest]: But then I told her to just check. And so she asked the audience, what do you feel? And suddenly
[Guest]: we realized that the majority of the men there are against the exemption for marital rape.
[Guest]: So this lady asked them, but why were you clapping for those guys?
[Guest]: They said, we didn't know how to show our opposition because we are sitting in the show.
[Guest]: So how to make a noise? Toh hum toh unko mazaak mein kar rahe the unko to taunt them.
[Guest]: So the problem is I've noticed this on other occasions also that people don't know,
[Guest]: you know, the idea of clapping, it can happen when something very sad is said,
[Guest]: when something outrageous is said, you know, clapping is your way of saying, okay, I noticed
[Guest]: this and you know, how ridiculous also sometimes. So it turned out that most of those young men
[Guest]: were saying, we're disgusted by the idea that the law says that if I marry my wife,
[Guest]: then I have a right to her whether she likes it or not, you know.
[Guest]: So I was very reassured by that, frankly, and I believe, but I wish a lot of more men
[Guest]: would take it on themselves in a systematic way, you know, to talk to more young boys about
[Guest]: respecting consent.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a wonderful story. Maybe there's a preference cascade already happening in
[Amit Varma]: this great advice from you. And as I was saying, I hope a lot of young women and men both,
[Amit Varma]: you know, get inspired by your words and read your book, I actually wanted to discuss your book
[Amit Varma]: chapter by chapter is so full of insights and all of that, but I won't do that. I think I've
[Amit Varma]: taken enough time. So one final, longish question, which is, you know, I've been meaning to invite
[Amit Varma]: you for the longest time to this show, I've admired your work and your writing. And it's
[Amit Varma]: really sort of the Tarun Tejpal thread that kind of got me down to it, because I was just absolutely
[Amit Varma]: disgusted for a number of reasons. I mean, he was acquitted of a crime that he had basically
[Amit Varma]: confessed to, he had, you know, in his confession letter, in fact, he had sort of shown that
[Amit Varma]: attitude of treating women as a property of men when he offered to apologize, apologize to the
[Amit Varma]: boyfriend of the survivor, you know, if you remember, which is bizarre, and you've written
[Amit Varma]: a wonderful sort of dissection of the judgment, which I just came across this morning, which I
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes. And that says everything. And in the past, also, you've
[Amit Varma]: written about, say, someone like Mahmood Farooqui, who was first convicted and then acquitted by a
[Amit Varma]: higher court on the grounds of what is famously known as a feeble no, where the judge said that
[Amit Varma]: the woman had said no, they accepted that, but they said, you know, it could be a feeble no,
[Amit Varma]: who is to say why why is a poor man to blame? Shocking, but what shocks me more than just these
[Amit Varma]: judgments, by now you have the new rape laws in effect that were done after 2012. And all of that,
[Amit Varma]: so the laws are in place, the judgment is horrible, the Tejpal judgment, in fact, was by a lady judge.
[Amit Varma]: So one, you have the law, letting these guys get away with with the shocking sort of reasoning.
[Amit Varma]: And two, these guys are going to be rehabilitated. You and I know that, you know, Farooqui was at
[Amit Varma]: JLF this year. Next year, I won't be surprised if Tejpal is also there. I mean, I honestly don't
[Amit Varma]: know what the freaking organizers are thinking. It's just absurd. And you actually have these,
[Amit Varma]: you know, cabals of Delhi liberals who are who are on their side. So my question here is this that
[Amit Varma]: given all of this, you know, at one step, it would seem that it's two steps forward and
[Amit Varma]: or four steps forward, three steps back is perhaps more like it. And I'd find reason for hope in the
[Amit Varma]: fact that in exactly the anecdote that you described at that show where all these men are
[Amit Varma]: kind of clapping that, you know, possibly there's a lot of silent people out there who may not speak
[Amit Varma]: up now but who realize that there are others like them who are, you know, who feel the same way and
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people who may, you know, listen to you or read you and they may change your mind. So that
[Amit Varma]: makes me kind of hopeful. But at the same time, you look at these judgments, you look at what's
[Amit Varma]: going on and the way the country is descending in all kinds of different ways. It also makes us
[Amit Varma]: despair. So looking ahead, looking say 20 years ahead, what makes you hope and what makes you
[Guest]: despair? So what makes me hope is I think that I feel that the backlash we are seeing now in these
[Guest]: judgments also or in the love jihad laws or whatever it is, I feel that that is more of a
[Guest]: backlash of the privileged who are, you know, banding together either in a very organized way
[Guest]: with the RSS and the BJP, but even I would say across party lines, you know, in order to basically
[Guest]: band together to push back against some kind of feminist assertion. Okay, so what you're seeing
[Guest]: in the Tejpal Faruqi kind of context, and I can tell you something that the BJP kind of trolling,
[Guest]: Sangeet trolling has never bothered me very much. Some of the worst trolling I have received and
[Guest]: which has really, really troubled me and given me sleepless nights has been the trolling by friends,
[Guest]: by those I would consider on our side on these two judgments, these two cases. Okay, so Tejpal
[Guest]: Faruqi, both cases. Horrible. I mean, really very, very disturbing the kind of things that have been
[Guest]: said and said not only about the survivors, but about us. My only thing which I just wanted to
[Guest]: say before I get on to, you know, what makes me hopeful, I just want to say since you mentioned
[Guest]: those judgments at length, I just wanted to clarify one thing. You see, I am at the end of
[Guest]: the day, I'm not someone who is just out for, you know, punish, punish, punish, punish. That's not my
[Guest]: concern. Okay, how much punishment also is my least concern. I do not, I'm not talking about
[Guest]: severity of punishment. Frankly, I'm not, you know, I engage with the law only to try and make
[Guest]: sure that it's, it's, it doesn't become the worst law possible. Even in 2012-13, my only fear was
[Guest]: that they would bring in all kinds of horrible things and how to prevent them from so doing. Okay,
[Guest]: so that was more of the effort. My point is that I am all for, I will not quarrel with an acquittal.
[Guest]: If the acquittal is on the grounds that, look, whatever evidence is being brought here,
[Guest]: we are not able to make it add up to say that beyond reasonable doubt, this must have happened.
[Guest]: So while we acknowledge, I'm saying even in the Tejpal case, okay, he wrote these letters,
[Guest]: all right. But suppose, you know, for a minute, you forget that this is Tejpal and forget that
[Guest]: it is these particular letters and what the letters content is. Imagine some other case.
[Guest]: I would say that, you know, suppose somebody writes letters and is asked to write letters
[Guest]: by an institution, he writes them, and then there is a court case and so on. I would say that perhaps
[Guest]: he is within his rights, his defense is within his rights to say, look, you know, you obtain these
[Guest]: confessions as a form of punishment. And now you are using them, you know, for another punishment
[Guest]: in another forum. So don't you think this is wrong or whatever? Okay, so in another case,
[Guest]: I'm not talking about the Tejpal case right now, but I'm saying that I can imagine that being an
[Guest]: argument. So on any grounds, if the judge were to conclude that, you know, evidence doesn't meet up,
[Guest]: therefore I'm acquitting, I'll say fine. I'm not going to, you know, I would not feel particularly
[Guest]: bothered by that. I think what botherss me about both the Tejpal acquittal and the Farooqi's High
[Guest]: Court acquittal was what was said in order to do this, which is that you are basically saying that
[Guest]: you are setting absurd standards which no woman can ever match up to. You know, it's hard enough
[Guest]: for a woman to actually say no. You're conveying no with everything in your body and you're this
[Guest]: thing. The law does not, the letter of the law does not say you have to say no. The letter of
[Guest]: the law says that the man should not proceed unless, you know, by word or gestures as a yes.
[Guest]: Okay, so the point is that, but most men who violate these rules and every woman I can tell
[Guest]: you has an experience of this, everyone. I don't know anybody who doesn't, okay. They may not have
[Guest]: complained, they may not have, everybody including me. We have experiences of people violating our
[Guest]: boundaries and telling themselves that we are consenting. No matter how often, it's like you're
[Guest]: talking to, okay, in one instance that I recall in my own experience. Here I am continuously,
[Guest]: you know, twisting my body, making it stiff. No, the guy still thinks it's okay to, you know,
[Guest]: pat and touch and whatnot. And then it goes further. Guy starts sending love letters and whatnot.
[Guest]: I'm replying over and over saying politely that I respect you, but I'm not interested in any of
[Guest]: this. I don't feel for you at all this way. I'm not interested. Guy takes my respect your statement
[Guest]: to say, I realize that you're in love with me, but this will be a secret between us. And I'm like,
[Guest]: where did I say this? I didn't say it. So the point is the guy who was doing the violating
[Guest]: doesn't respect my agency. He is constructing a, you know, he may be telling himself that I'm
[Guest]: consenting. Maybe he's lying to himself also. But that doesn't mean that the onus is on me to make
[Guest]: him understand it. The point is, if I've said no, let him kindly accept. And if there's a doubt,
[Guest]: then give me the benefit of doubt. Say that I'm going to back off until I'm sure that there's this
[Guest]: heavy enthusiastic yes happening. So it's as simple as that. But the point is, these judgments
[Guest]: don't do that. These judgments set absurd standards. What does feeble know? How is she
[Guest]: supposed to scream no? How loud should that decibel be? What is this thing of saying how
[Guest]: should a normative victim behave? And as my piece says, I'm not going to the details. I'll just say
[Guest]: that my piece elaborates on, it takes down the idea which some of Tejpal's friends are saying,
[Guest]: which is that no, no, ignore the misogyny bit. That bit may be wrong, but substantially there
[Guest]: are facts which have been brought forward that prove the, you know, complainant to be lying.
[Guest]: No, there aren't. And that's what my piece takes down because, in fact, what the judge is doing is
[Guest]: she's accepting Tejpal's letters as fact, conveniently when she wants to. And she's
[Guest]: using those facts. She's in a sense saying, guy says that you didn't complain and you didn't cry.
[Guest]: So you're lying when you said you complained and you cried and there was an incident.
[Guest]: Now, how can this kind of reasoning, you know, in the face of this reasoning, no fair trial is
[Guest]: ever possible. No woman can ever hope to be believed, right? So this is what I want everyone
[Guest]: to think about there. As for hope, even in these very, very bleak times, I feel that the hope comes
[Guest]: from those who are fighting back against these things, the ones who are trying to say, what
[Guest]: values do we stand for? Do we decide on a matter of rape? Do we decide where we stand based on who
[Guest]: is accused and who is the survivor? What is their community? What is their politics? Or do we decide
[Guest]: that even if it is one of our friends, one of our own who is violating, you know, consent, that's
[Guest]: wrong. Do we decide that, okay, the consensus in, you know, those who are triumphant today, those
[Guest]: who are, you know, claiming to be all powerful today are telling us that interreligious marriage
[Guest]: is wrong or that, you know, the Muslims do not have a right to be, you know, their citizenship
[Guest]: should be in doubt. We should have a right to, you know, the state should have a right to reject or
[Guest]: accept them as citizens. They have to throw their citizenship in doubt, you know. Are there people
[Guest]: who are willing to fight back, who are willing to say, no, no, no, no, no. Democracy is not about
[Guest]: just accepting every law that is passed. Democracy is about every citizen questioning the government
[Guest]: and speaking up even at risk to themselves. I think there's a lot of that happening and there's
[Guest]: enough of it happening to give me hope. I am deeply pained by the thought of the young women
[Guest]: who are in jail today. You know, what's the lawyer's name, Tushar Mehta, on the Tejpal case,
[Guest]: when he's arguing in high court, he's saying, oh my God, I'm a feminist and why is it wrong to be
[Guest]: a feminist and all of that. And I thought to myself when I read that report yesterday in the
[Guest]: paper that he's defending, you know, he's questioning the Tejpal acquittal and in the
[Guest]: appeal he's saying, why are feminists being attacked and even I'm a feminist. I feel like
[Guest]: if I were to meet him, I would ask him, your government that you are defending is locking up
[Guest]: feminists, locking up a young woman like Natasha, not even allowing her to meet her father,
[Guest]: you know, who died without his daughter being able to meet him. How terrible is that? Natasha,
[Guest]: Devangana, Sudha Bharadwaj, you know, these people, the thought of them being in prison today
[Guest]: bothers me. But I also get hope from the fact that they are taking this risk for our country.
[Guest]: They are taking this risk to try and defend the values that should be giving us hope. And so,
[Guest]: I feel that in this pandemic times, I feel that although the suffering has been so terrible,
[Guest]: the fact that people helped themselves, formed communities of help, irrespective of caste and
[Guest]: community and all of that, helped each other, helped each other to try and live,
[Guest]: helped each other to breathe, helped each other, you know, to have dignity in death.
[Guest]: Somehow, I feel that if we draw upon even that very deep grief and sorrow,
[Guest]: that would be truly a positive thing. I'm not talking about, you know, this negativity,
[Guest]: positivity, all this government is trying to tell us, not saying that. I genuinely feel that the
[Guest]: most positive thing that we can do as citizens is to draw hope from that deep collective grief
[Guest]: and to say that if we find a way, find our way back as a society of caring for each other,
[Guest]: mourning those who have died, not just those who died of COVID and of oxygen shortage,
[Guest]: but those who died in last year's lockdown, migrant workers, those who died because of
[Guest]: lynching, those who died because of medical care, those who died because of lack of food,
[Guest]: all these things, if we find a way back trying to figure out how to care for each other,
[Guest]: care for each other, I think from there you will, I hope for a new politics, a new political
[Guest]: awakening and somehow a society that finds the courage and the moral value, the moral strength
[Guest]: to actually take us to a better place than the terrible place we are in today.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words. And you mentioned Natasha Narwal and I was just heartbroken by that
[Amit Varma]: picture of her going back into jail with that smile on her face. And maybe the young will
[Amit Varma]: save us. You know, maybe people of our generation kind of took it for granted that India has gained
[Amit Varma]: freedom, that the country is what it is, it's been made, the job is over. And maybe the young
[Amit Varma]: today can look around and realize that the job isn't over. We've still got a fight on our hands.
[Amit Varma]: So, Kavita, thank you so much for coming on the show and sharing your time and insights.
[Guest]: It was absolutely a pleasure, Amit. And I've admired your show and enjoyed it since last
[Guest]: year. I didn't know about it before that. Because as I said, I, you know, I began listening to
[Guest]: podcasts only last year during the lockdown. But I enjoyed so many of yours so much. And
[Amit Varma]: it's I really enjoyed today's conversation. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of the Seen and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any
[Amit Varma]: amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.